Chapter 17 The Savanna or Sudan
Climate
Distribution
The Savanna or Sudan Climate is a transitional type
of climate found between the equatorial forests and
the trade wind hot deserts. It is confined within the
tropics and is best developed in the Sudan where the
dry and wet seasons are most distinct, hence its
name the Sudan Climate. The belt includes West
African Sudan. and then curves southwards into
East Africa and southern Africa north of the Tropic
of Capricorn as shown in Fig. 17.1. In South Amer-
ica, there are two distinct regions of savannas north
and south of the equator, namely the llanos of the
Orinoco basin and the campos of the Brazilian High-
lands. The Australian savanna is located south of the
monsoon strip running from west to east north of the
Tropic of Capricorn.
Fig. 17.1 Regions of Sudan Climate with savanna ortropical
grasslands
Glimate of the Sudan Type
Rainfall. The Sudan type of climate is characterized
by an alternate hot, rainy season and cool, dry sea-
son, as illustrated in Fig. t7.2(a). In the northern
hemisphere, the hot, rainy season normally begins
in May and lasts until September, as in Kano,
Nigeria. The rest of the year is cool and dry. The
annual rainfall for Kano, which is located at a height
of.470 metres (1,539 feet) above sea-level, is 864 mm
(34 inches) and is almost entirely concentrated in the
summer. But the amount varies from 1 219 mm (48
inches) at Bathurst, in Gambia on the coast to only
I27 mm (5 inches) at Khartoum, in Sudan in the
interior. Both the length of the rainy season and the
annual total rainfall decrease appreciably from the
equatorial region polewards towards the desert
Scale 1 :21500000O

't02l4
51t2
oto JFMAMJJASOND
months
Salisbury: 
J
Temp. oC: 
oF.: 
Precip. (mml: 191
(anches):7.5
O N D 
range/total
22 22 21 8"C
7t 7t 70 15"F.
28 94 147 813 mm
l l 37 5.8 32inches
Fig. 17.2(b)
The Savanna or Sudan Climate in the southern hemisphere
Place: Salisbury, Zimbabwe (17" 4S,S, 31"8)
Altitude: 1 352 m (4,435 feet)
Annual precipitation: 813 mm (32 inches)
Annual temperature range: B.C (21.-13.C/1S.F. (71"-S6.F.)
uncommon at this time of the year. This extreme
diurnal range of temperature is another character-
istic feature of the Sudan type of climate.
Winds. The prevailing winds of the region are the
Trade Winds, which bring rain to the coastal dis-
tricts. They are strongest in the summer but are rel-
atively dry by the time they reach the continental
interiors or the western coasts of the continents, so
that grass and scattered short trees predominate. In
West Africa, the North-East Trades. in fact. blow
off-shore from the Sahara Desert and reach the
Guinea coast as a dry, dust-laden wind, called locally
the Harmattan, meaning 'the doctor,. It is so dry
that its relative humidity seldom exceeds 30 per cent.
'The doctor' provides a welcome relief from the
damp air of the Guinea lands by increasing the rate
of evaporation with resultant cooling effects, but it
is such a dry dusty wind that, besides ruining the
crops, it also stirs up a thick dusty haze and impedes
inland river navigation.
Natural Vegetation
The savanna type of vegetation, typified by tall grass
and short scattered trees is the product of a tropical
wet-dry climate, transitional between that of the hot
32t90
27lao
21/70
'::
c--
FE
-E
17al
21170
16/60
1 0/50
.s!
=o
c>
'tD E
:g
O^
etD
E
FMAI/JJAS
21 20 19 16 14 13 16 l9
69 68 66 61 57 56 60 66
r88 il4 25 13 0 0 
74 4.5 r.O 0.5 0 0 
0.1 03
N
.;
J.
FoTD
E-
o
305/1
2ilt1
20318
15216
10114
o/0
Kanol
Temp.'c:
Precip. {mm}:
(inches':
JFMAMJJASON
Months
JFMAMJJASO
22 25 29 32 31 28 27 26 27 21
72 77 a5 89 88 83 80 78 8o 8l
0 3 
13 64 r22 208 307 140 t3
0 0.r 0.r 05 2.5 48 82 l2.l 55 o5
D range/total
37 9'C
73 17"F.
864 mm
O 34 inches
Fig. 17.2lal
The Savanna or Sudan Climate in the northern hemisphere
Place: Kano, Nigeria (11" 58' N, B" 20, E)
Altitude: 469 metres (1,539 feet)
Annual precipitation: 864 mm (34 inches)
Annuaf temperature range: 9'C 131"-22 "Cy17 .F (Bg.-
72"F\
fringes. On the whole, the annual precipitation is
less than that of the Tropical Monsoon Climate and
the length of the wet and dry seasons differs with the
locality. In the southern hemisphere, the rainy sea-
son is from October to March (the southern sum-
mer) as shown in Fig. 17.2(b) of Salisbury, in
Zimbabwe. Its annual precipitation of 812 mm (32
inches) also varies much from year to year.
Temperature. The monthly temperature hovers
between 2l "C (70 oF) and 32"C (90 'F) for lowland
stations. An annual temperature range of lL oC
(20'F) is typical, but the range increases as one
moves further away from the equator. It is, how-
ever, interesting to note that the highest tempera-
tures do not coincide with the period of the highest
sun (e.g. June in the northern hemisphere) but occur
just before the onset of the rainy season, i.e. April
in Kano and October in Salisbury. There is also a
distinct drop in temperature in the rainy period, due
to the overcast sky and the cooler atmosphere.
Days are hot, and during the hot season, noon
temperatures of over 38'C (100 .F) are quite fre-
quent. When night falls the clear sky which pro-
motes intense heating during the day also causes
rapid radiation in the night. Temperatures drop to
well below 10 "C (50'F) and night frosts are not
r66

Savanna
Fig. 17.3 Changes in vegetation from savanna to desert
desert and the tropical forest. It is rather misleading
to call the savanna 'tropical grassland', because trees
are always present amongst the luxuriant tall grass.
Perhaps the terms 'parkland' or'bush veld' describe
the landsqape better.
Equatorwards,the trees increase in size and den-
sity due to an increase in annual rainfall and a less
distinct dry-wet climatic rhythm. But desertwards
the vegetation merges into scrub and thorny bushes
(Fig. 17.3). The continuous grass cover gives way to
short scattered tufts on the desert margins. In Aus-
tralia, this scrubland is particularly well represented
by a number of species: mallee, mulga, spinifex grass
and other bushes.
Trees and plants have to adapt themselves to the
savanna climatic rhythm of long winter drought and
short summer rain. Both trees and plants are there-
fore deciduous in nature, shedding their leaves in the
cool dry season to prevent excessive loss of water
through transpiration and lying dormant during the
17.A The baobab tree is typical of savanna trees. lt has a
thick water-storing trunk with minimum leaves to reduce
transpiration. Poppertoto
long drought. They have long roots (e.g. acacias) to
search for groundwater or broad trunks (e.g. baob-
abs and bottle trees) to store up excessive water
(Plate 17.A). Trees are mostly hard, gnarled and
thorny and may exude gum (e.g. gum arabic). Many
trees are umbrella-shapd to shield their roots from
the scorching heat and to expose only a narrow edge
to the strong trade winds that blow all year round.
Palms which cannot withstand the drought are con-
fined to the wettest areas or along rivers.
In true savanna lands, the grass is tall and coarse'
growing 2 to 4 metres (6 to 12 feet) high. The ele-
phant grass may attain a height of 5 metres (15 feet)
even! The grass which grows in compact tufts has
long roots which reach deep down in search of water.
The appearance of the savanna vegetation changes
with the season. It appears green and fresh in the
rainy season, but turns yellowish-brown and parched
with the ensuing dry season.
Animal Life of the Savanna
The savanna, particularly in Africa, is the home of
wild animals. It is known as the 'big game country'
and thousands of animals are trapped or killed each
year by people from all over the world. Some of the
animals are tracked down for their skins, horns,
tusks, bones or hair, others are captured alive and
sent out of Africa as zoo animals, laboratory speci-
mens or pets. There is such a wealth of animal life
in Africa that many of the animal films that we see
at the cinema are actually taken in the savanna.
There are, in fact, two main groups of animals in
the savanna, the grass-eating herbivorous animals
and the flesh-eating carnivorous animals. The her-
bivorous animals are often very alert and move
swiftly from place to place in search of green pas-
tures. They are endowed with great speed to run
away from the savage flesh-eaters that are always
t67

17.B Giraffes in the savanna. The vegetation is of grass ano
scattered trees. J. Allen Cash
after them. The leaf and grass-eating animals include
the zebra, antelope, giraffe, deer, gazelle, elephant
and okapi. Many are well camouflaged species and
their presence amongst the tall greenish-brown grass
cannot be easily detected (Plates 17.B and C). The
giraffe with such a long neck can locate its enemies
a great distance away, while the elephant is so huge
and strong that few animals will venture to come
near it. It is well equipped with tusks and trunk for
defence.
17.C The savanna vegetation provides an excellent cam-
ouflage for animals. Servizio Editoriale Fotografico
The carnivorous animals like the lion, tiger, leop-
ard, hyena, panther, jaguar, jackal, lynx and puma
have powerful jaws and teeth for attacking other
animals. Their natural colourings of light, yellowish-
brown, often with stripes like the tiger or spots like
the leopar{, match perfectly with the tawny back-
ground of the savanna. They often hide themselves
in shady spots up in the branches or amidst the tall
bushes, and many wild animals, as well as hunters
themselves, are caught unaware in this manner.
Along rivers and in marshy lakes are numerous spe-
cies of reptiles and mammals including crocodiles,
alligators, monitors and giant lizards together with
the larger rhinoceros and hippopotamus. In such an
animal paradise there are many diverse species of
birds, snakes, butterflies, moths and insects.
In many parts of East and South Africa, national
parks have been set up which control the killing of
animals. This is a necessity, if many of the rare spe-
cies of animals are to be preserved and protected
from wanton killing. In Kenya there are large hotels
and viewing-towers, built in the heart of the
savanna, with special transport arrangements to
bring tourists in to see the animals in their natural
settings. This is a progressive step made in conserv-
ing animal life in the savanna and shou.ld be encour-
aged.
Human Life in the Savanna
Within the savanna lands of the tropics live many
different tribes who are either cattle pastoralists like
the Masai of the East African Plateau or settled cul-

tivators like the Hausa of northern Nigeria. We shall
examine the life of these two groups of people more
closely, and see how they adapt themselves to the
savanna environment,
The Masai, cattle pastoralists. The Masai are a
nomadic tribe who once wandered with their herds
of cattle in the central highlands of East Africa-in
Kenya, Tanzania and Uganda. At the height of their
power, in the mid-nineteenth century they num-
bered about 50 000. But today after a century's
tribal clashes, epidemics and natural deaths, their
numbers have been greatly reduced. They are now
mainly confined to the 39 000 sq. km (15,000 square
miles) of Masai reserves in Kenya and Tanzania.
Their old grazing grounds in the Kenyan Highlands
were taken over first by the immigrant white settlers
for plantation agriculture (coffee, tea, cotton) and
dairy farming and later, after independence, by
African farmers. They now occupy the less favoured
areas of the savanna in which are grazed something
like a million cattle and perhaps twice as many sheep
and goats. On the lower slopes of the East African
plateau, where rainfall is as low as 508 mm (20
inches) and there are long periods of drought, the
grass seldom reaches a metre high and is not nutri-
tious. When there is a drought, the Masai move
upwards to the higher and cooler plateau regions in
which their herds can graze on the better pastures.
They build circular huts with sticks, bushes and mud
for temporary shelter. The cattle are kept in a spe-
cial enclosure at night and are prqtected from attack
by wild animals by a strong fence.
The cattle kept by the Masai are the zebu cattle
with humps and long horns. They are treated with
great respect and affection and are never slaugh-
tered for food or for sale. The beef is only consumed
when they die a natural death from old age or dis-
ease. They are never used as draught animals and
are kept entirely for the supply of milk and
blood. Milking is done by women before day-break
and at dusk. The yield is extremely low by any stand-
ard and usually not more than one litre (two pints)
are obtained at a single milking. The milk is drunk
either fresh or sour. Cheese-making is still not
known to the Masai. Blood from both bulls and cows
is drunk. This is obtained by tying a leather cord
around the neck of an animal until the veins swell.
A vein is then punctured by a special arrow-head
and the blood gushes out and is collected and drunk
fresh or clotted (Plate 17.D).
Cattle are kept by every Masai family. They are
considered far more valuable than anything else, and
17.D The Masai tribesmen drink the blood as well as the
mifk of their animals but do not kill them for meat. Camera
Press
are symbols of wealth. The richest man has the larg-
est herds of cattle, leaving aside the sheep and goats
which, to the Masai tribes, are of little significance.
Cattle are used in payment for wives, and when the
father of a family dies, the mother divides the live-
stock among the sons. The Masai will not slaughter
the cattle for food, so from the agricultural tribes
such as the Kikuyu of Kenya, they obtain a small
amount of millet, bananas, groundnuts and vegeta-
bles.
Because the number of cattle is more important
to the Masai than their quality, the Masai will not
willingly sell their cattle. So the large area of land
which they occupy in East Africa is not used prof-
itably. Great efforts are being made to get the Masai
to care for their animals properly and raise them for
sale, keeping orrly as many animals as the pasture
can support. Many Masai are responding to modern
techniques but the majority stubbornly continue in
their old ways. Amongst most of the other African
tribes, pastoralism exists side by side with agricul-
ture.
The Hausa, settled cultivators. The Hausa are a
group of settled cultivators who inhabit the savanna-
lands of the Bauchi Plateau of northern Nigeria.
They number almost six million and have been
organized in settled agricultural communities for
hundreds of years. They are more advanced in their
civilization and ways of life than many of the other
African peoples.
The Hausa live in towns or villages. The ancient
Hausa city of Kano, with a population of 300 000 has
long been a focus of routes and trade. They do not

practise shifting cultivation as many tribes do.
Instead, they clear a piece of land and use it for sev-
eral years, growing a wide range of crops like maize,
millet, Guinea corn, groundnuts, bananas and
beans. Some Hausa also cultivate non-food crops,
e.g. cotton and tobacco. When the fertility of the
plot declines, they plant a new field and allow the
old one to lie fallow. This enables natural forces to
act on it until fertility is restored. New crops are then
sown in the old plot again and the harvests are good.
In this manner, the Hausa rotate their crops between
different fields at different parts of the year, which
is a technique employed in advanced agricultural
societies.
Besides cultivation, the Hausa also make use of
domesticated animals. Herds of cattle and goats are
kept for both milk and meat, but they are only sub-
sidiary to crop cultivation. Though they do not con-
tribute much to the income of the Hausa, because
of their small numbers, their manure is used to fer-
tilize the fields. Poultry are raised by the villagers
and both eggs and chicken are consumed.
The farming year is very closely related to the sea-
son of rainfall. In Nigeria, the rainy season begins
in May and lasts till September. The annual precip-
itation is about 1 010 mm (40 inches), falling entirely
in summer. The Hausa sow the seeds in late April
when sufficient rain has fallen. The seedlings sprout
with the heavy rain and grow rapidly throughout the
rainy season. Weeding with traditional hoes is done
at regular intervals till the crops are ripened and har-
vested in September, the beginning of the cool, dry
season. The tall brown bushes are burnt down by the
farmers in preparation for new fields for the follow-
ing year. Sometimes fires may be caused by the dry,
dusty Harmattan.
Problems, Prospects and Development
of the savanna
There is little doubt that in years to come, world
population pressure and the need for greater food
production will necessitate greater economic devel-
opment of the savanna. The deserts or the freezing
tundra form climatic barriers too formidable for
large-scale human intervention to take place. But
the savanna lands with an annual rainfall of over
760 mm (30 inches) and without any severe cold,
should be able to support a wide range of tropical
crops. Pioneer settlements in central Africa, north-
ern Australia and eastern Brazil have shown that the
savannas have immense agricultural potential for
plantation agriculture of cotton, sugar cane, coffee,
oil palm, groundnuts and even tropical fruits. Trop-
ical Queensland, despite its scarcity of labour has
been very successful in its attempts to develop its
huge empty land. The newly independent states of
Kenya, Uganda, Tanzania and Malawi have already
taken to large-scale production of cotton and sisal
hemp. Both crops thrive well in savanna conditions.
In West Africa, the commercial cultivation of
groundnuts, oil palm and cocoa have been gradually
extended into the savanna lands. New drought-
resistant varieties will have to be introduced into
these newly emergent countries to increase their for-
eign earnings in such tropical raw materials. In the
cooler highlands, temperate crops have been suc-
cessfully raised.
But farming in the savanna land is not without
natural hazards. Droughts may be long and trying,
as rainfall is often unreliable. Unless counter-meas-
ures can be taken in the form of adequate provision
for irrigation, improved crop varieties and scientific
farming techniques suitable for the tropical grass-
lands, crop failures can be disastrous for the people,
who have very little to fall back on. The Sudan Cli-
mate, with distinct wet-and-dry periods is also
responsible for the rapid deterioration of soil fertil-
ity. During the rainy season, torrential downpours
of heavy rain cause leaching, in which most of the
plant nutrients such as nitrates, phosphates and
potash are dissolved and washed away. During the
dry season, intense heating and evaporation dry up
most of the water. Many savanna areas therefore
have poor lateritic soils which are incapable of sup-
porting good crops. Unless the soil is properly con-
served through regular manuring, weeding and
careful maintenance, crop yields are bound to
decline.
The savanna is said to be natural cattle country
and many of the native people are, in fact, herdsmen
or pastoralists. Cattle are kept in large numbers and
fed on tall grass or bushes. They provide the people
with milk, blood and meat. Unfortunately, the
native zebu cattle are bony and yield little meat or
milk. They often fall victim to tropical diseases, e.g.
the ngana or sleeping sickness carried by the tsetse
fly in Africa. The export of either beef or milk from
the tropical grasslands is so far not important.
It seems necessary to introduce temperate cattle
such as the English Shorthorn, Friesian or Guernsey
to cross with the tropical zebu,if. cattle rearing is to
be successful in the savanna. In fact, a start has
already been made in tropical Queensland which has

become Australia's largest cattle producing state.
Both meat and milk are exported. In other regions
such as the campos and llanos of South America,
though cattle ranching has been carried out for cen-
turies, little progress has been made so far. The qual-
ity of the grass needs to be improved and a better
network of communications is essential. Above all
cattle breeding and disease control must be carried
Ouestions and Exercises
1. The foflowing are brief descriprions of three
different types of climate.
(a) A very large temperature range, with sum-
mer rain.
(b) Distinct wet and dry seasons with concen-
trated summer rain.
(c) High uniform temperature with well dis-
tributed heavy rainfall.
i. Name the type of climate.
ii. For any two of them, give a fuller
description of the climate and the factors
which give rise to it.
2. Explain why:
(a) The savanna lands have a parkland type of
natural vegetation.
(b) The savanna is the natural home of cattle.
(c) The savanna grass decreases in height and
luxuriance further away from the equator.
(d) Rainfall in the Sudan Climate is concen-
trated in the summer.
3. Write a descriptive account of:
Either: The Masai, pastoralists of East
Africa.
Or: The Hausa, food growers of northern
Nigeria.
You should bear in mind the environmen-
tal influence on their mode of living.
4. It is said that the savanna land holds great
promise for the future. Do you think so? Why?
Outline some of the probable difficulties that
may be encountered in their development.
5. Write brief notes on the following:
(a) The effects of Harmattan in West Africa.
(b) The savanna is the 'Big Game Country'.
(c) Tropical grasslands have great potential
for the cultivation of tropical hot crops,
e.g. cotton, coffee, fruits.
(d) The savanna is a transitional zone between
the equatorial forests and the hot deserts.
out on a scientific basis. In the African savanna, the
attitude of such native herdsmen as the Masai who
treat cattle as prestige animals, not for slaughtering,
will pose many difficulties towards the commercial-
ization of the cattle industry. But as an agricultural
region, the savanna holds great promise for the
future.
(a) Briefly describe the main characteristics of
the Savanna or Sudan type of clirnate.
(b) In what respect is it similar to that of the
tropical monsoon type of climate?
(c) What difficulties would this type of climate
present to agricultural development?
(a) In which continent is the Sudan type of cli-
mate most common?
(b) Why is this type of climate more suited to
grass than to trees?
(c) Describe how the climate and vegetation
here influence the lives of the people.
With the aid of separate sketch maps, cite an
example for each of the following:
(a) a savanna region;
(b) a region of hot, wet forests;
(c) a tundra region.
For any two of. the above regions you have cho-
sen:
i. briefly outline the characteristics of the
natural vegetation;
ii. show how the main features are related
to the climate of the area.
Explain any two of the following statements:
(a) Savanna plants have to adapt themselves
to withstand the lengthy droughts which
come in the cooler part of the year.
(b) The diurnal range of temperature is very
great in deserts.
(c) Man has had a great influence on plant and
animal life the world over.
(a) In what ways do conditions in the savanna
grassland differ from those of the Steppe
grassland?
(b) Describe how men make use of the grass-
lands.
(c) Which of the two types of grasslands men-
tioned above is likely to be more inten-
sively used? Give your reasons.
6.
8.
9.
10.
t71

Sample Obiective Ouestions
1. Thc tropical continental savanna
type of climate is best described as
having
A winter rain and summer drought
B summer rain and winter drought
C a mild, wet autumn and a cool.
dry spring
D much rain all the year round
2. The savanna type of vegetation is
different from the other types of
vegetation because of its
A evergreen trees
B widespread scrub
C thorny bushes
D tall grass and scattered trees
3. Tropical savanna land has the
greatest potential for
A extensive wheat farming
B irrigated orchard farming
C cattle rearing
D inland fish culture
4. The savanna or Sudan type of cli-
mate is mainly found
A within the tropics
B outside the tropics
C on the castem coastlands of con-
tinents
D where trade winds blow off-shore
In savanna lands, the greatest plant
grofih takes place in summer which
coincides with the
A elevation of the midday sun over
the tropics
B period of heaviest rain
C season of light showen
D equinoxes
5.

