Chapter 19 The Warm Temperate Western
Margin (Mediterranean) Climate
Distribution
The Warm Temperate Western Margin Climate is
found in relatively few areas in the world. They are
entirely confined to the western portion of continen-
tal masses, between 30' and 45' north and south of
the equator (Fig. 19.1). The basic cause of this type
of climate is the shifting of the wind belts, explained
in Chapter 14. Though the area around the Medi-
terranean Sea has the greatest extent of this type of
'winter rain climate', and gives rise to the more
popular name Mediterranean Climate, the best
developed form of this peculiar climatic type is,
in fact, found in central Chile (Fig. 19.2). Other
Mediterranean regions include California (around
San Francisco), the south-western tip of Africa
(around Cape Town), southern Australia (in south-
ern Victoria and around Adelaide, bordering the St.
Fig. 19.1 Regions with a Mediterranean Climate
Vincent and Spencer Gulfs), and south-western
Australia (Swanland).
Climate
The Mediterranean type of climate is characterized
by very distinctive climatic features.
1. A dry, warm summer with off-shore trades. As
illustrated in Fig. 19.3(a) and (b), the summer
months have a relatively high temperat we (24'Cl7 6"F
in July in Rome and21. 'C/70 "F in January in Cape
Town). The highest temperatures are however
experienced further away from the coast in the moie
continental eastern Mediterranean, in the interiors
of the Balkan peninsula, the Anatolian Plateau and
Mediterranean Middle East. For example, the July
mean for Athens is 27 "C (80 "F), Larisa (Greece)
27 "C (81. 'F) and Beirut (Lebanon) 28 "C (83 "F).
1>n e
N
t
'----r---
I
I
I 
M"dit"rtun"un
Scale: 1 : 215 00O 0OO
l8l

Fig. 19.2 Central Chile-a region with a typical Mediterra-
nean Climate-showing the shifting of the wind with most
rain falling in winter
Fig. 19.3(a)
Mediterranean Climate in the northern hemisphere
Place: Rome, ltaly {u,2'N, 12" E)
Altitude: 63 metres (207 feet)
Annual precipitation: 838: mm (33 inches)
Annuaf temperature range: 17"C Q4"-7 'Cy31 'F. (76'-
45 "F)
27 lao
21170
16/60
1 0/50
FMAMJJA
months
Elsewhere in central Chile, South Africa and Med-
iterranean Australia, due to their coastal position,
the influence of the sea has modified the tempera-
ture and the January means (Southern Summer) are
normally around 21 "C (70 "F).
In summer when the sun is overhead at the Tropic
of Cancer, the belt of influence of the Westerlies is
shifted a little polewards. Rain-bearing winds are
therefore not likely to reach the Mediterranean
lands. The prevailing Trade Winds are off-shore and
there is practically no rain. The air is dry, the heat
is intense and the relative humidity is low. Days are
excessively warm and in the interiors, prolonged
droughts are common. At night, there is rapid radia-
tion but frosts are rare.
2. A concentration of rainfall in winter with on-shore
Westerlies. The Mediterranean lands receive most
of their precipitation in winter when the Westerlies
shift equatorwards. In the northern hemisphere, the
prevailing on-shore Westerlies bring much cyclonic
rain from the Atlantic to the countries bordering the
Mediterranean Sea. This is the rainy season and is
the most outstanding feature of the Mediterranean
Climate. In almost all other climatic types, maximum
rain comes in summer. The mean annual rainfall is
Fis.19.3(b)
Mediterranean Climate in the southern hemisphere
Place: Cape Town, South Africa (34" S, 18'E)
Altitude: 12 metres (40 feet)
Annual precipitation: 635 mm (25 inches)
Annual temperature range: 8'C (21 '-13'C)/15'F (70"-
55 "F.)
27t80
21170
16/60
10/s0
4t40
51/2
251 1
0/0
cape Town:
temp. L:
Precrp. {mm):
(inches):
J J AS 
O
months
Rome:
Temp. oc:
Precip. {mm):
(inchesl
;fu
Eo
;
l|r
6O
E
ND
18 20
64 68
28 20
t.l 0.8
JFI\4AM
21 21 20 17 15
7o 70 68 63 59
r8 15 23 48 97
07 0.6 0.9 r.9 38
JFMAMJJASON
78111822222424211712
45 47 51 M 11 71 16 76 70 62 53
8f 69 74 66 56 41 t8 25 64 127 112
3.2 2.7 2.9 2.6 2.2 1.6 0.7 l.O 2.5 5.O 4.4
D 
range/rotal
I 
l7-C
46 31"F.
99 838 mm
JJA
't3 13 t3
56 55 56
114 94 86
4.5 3.7 3.4
range/total
8"C
15'F.
635 mm
25 inches
N
o
4l
oroJfiTlfTiTJ
r82

normally taken as 635 mm (25 inches). Again this
differs greatly from place to place, depending on
relief, continentality and the passage of the passing
cyclones. The annual rainfall for the two selected
stations Rome and Cape Town is 838 mm (33
inches) and 635 mm (25 inches) respectively, which
are quite typical of the regions they represent. The
rain comes in heavy showers and only on a few days
with bright sunny periods between them. This is
another characteristic feature of the Mediterranean
winter rain.
With a little more caution in relating the relief of
the Mediterranean lands to the rainfall distribution,
you will notice that the Mediterranean regions are
often backed by mountains of some kind. In Iberia,
the central Meseta and other Sierras of the peninsula
present an effective barrier to the oncoming Wes-
terlies. As a result the Portuguese coast is much wet-
ter than eastern Spain. Lisbon has an annual rainfall
of nearly 760 mm (30 inches) while Cartagena, along
the eastern coast of Spain does not receive even half
as much. Much heavier precipitation has been
recorded in the highlands on windward slopes facing
the Westerlies. The steep hills of the eastern
Adriatic are the rainiest parts of Europe with
4 623 mm (182 inches) recorded at Crkvice, about
1 100 metres (3,600 feet) above sea-level.
Rain in Mediterranean Europe normally begins in
September, reaching its peak somewhere in October
(127 mmls inches in Rome). Though the downpours
are infrequent, they are often very torrential and in
mountainous districts, destructive floods occur. The
floods come so suddenly that there is practically no
time to do anything about it. The disastrous flood of
Lisbon in 1967 came in the middle of the night and
caused great damage and loss of life in a few hours!
Snow rarely occurs on lowlands and coastal dis-
tricts and even if it does fall on the highlands, it is
moderate and is a source of water supply for hydro-
electric power generation and for irrigation.
3. Bright, sunny weather with hot, dry summers and
wet, mild winters. Considering its mid-latitude
position, the Mediterranean regions have a very
favourable climate, unrivalled by any other climatic
regions. The climatic features are transitional be-
tween those of the Trade Wind Hot Desert in the
south and the Cool Temperate Maritime Climate in
the north. Summers are warm and bright and winters
are so mild and cool that many tourists come at all
times of the year. The sky is almost cloudless and
sunshine is always abundant. In July, Rome has as
much as eleven hours of sunlight, and with the Med-
iterranean palm trees around, tourists feel very
much as if they are in the tropics! Even in mid-sum-
mer, the intense heat is never sultry. The combined
effects of on-shore winds and the maritime breezes
keep the temperature down to about 10 'C (50 "F) in
winter and not often exceedingZ4 'C (75 oF) in sum-
mer. The climate is do mild that many of the local
people sleep in the open air. The annual tempera-
ture range is between 8 o and 14 'C (15 " and 25 "F).
The Mediterranean regions are famous for their
health and pleasure resorts, frequented by millions
all the year round.
4. The prominence of local winds around the Medi-
terranean Sea. Many local winds, some hot, others
cold are common around the Mediterranean Sea.
The causes are many and varied. The topography of
the region with the high Alps in the north, the
Sahara desert in the south. continental interiors in
the east and the open Atlantic on the west give rise
to great differences in temperature, pressure and
precipitation. The passing cyclones from the Atlan-
tic, the anticyclones from the north, and the cold air
masses from the continental interiors are often inter-
rupted or channelled by relief features, resulting in
the birth of local winds around the Mediterranean.
These winds, varying in strength, direction and
duration, affect the lives, crops and activities of the
people there. Fig. 19.4 indicates the location and
direction of some of these local winds and the more
important ones are described below.
(a) Sirocco. This is a hot, dry dusty wind which
originates in the Sahara Desert. Though it may occur
at any time of the year, it is most frequent in spring
and normally lasts for only a few days. The Sirocco
blows outwards in a northerly direction from the
desert interiors into the cooler Mediterranean Sea.
It is usually associated with depression from the
Atlantic passing from the coast eastwards inland.
After crossing the Mediterranean Sea, the Sirocco
Fig. 19.4 Local Winds of the Mediterranean Sea
f 
+;re are.as 
\--
- 
hot Wlnds 
"riibr i \- 
\ x.a:'

is slightly cooled by the absorption of the water
vapour. Even then, it is still hot and dry with a tem-
perature of over 40 "C (105 "F). Its scorching breath
withers vegetation and crops. The damage is partic-
ularly serious when it comes during the period when
vines and olives are in blossom. The Sirocco is so
prominent that it is called by many other local
names, such as Chili in Tunisia, Ghibli in Libya, Lev-
eche in Spain, Khamsin in Egypt and Malta. In the
Adriatic and Aegean Sea, this hot wind, better
known as Gharbi, gathers much moisture causing
fog, heavy dew and rain. This may be 'blood rain'
because the wind is carrying the red dust of the
Sahara Desert.
(b) Mistral. In contrast, the Mistral is a cold wind
from the north rushing down the Rh6ne valley in
violent gusts between 65 and 130 km.p.h. (40 and
80 m.p.h.). The velocity of the Mistral is intensified
by the funnelling effect in the valley between the
Alps and the Central Massif, and in extreme cases
trains may be derailed and trees uprooted. In winter
when the Mistral is most frequent the temperature
of the wind may be below freezing-point, though the
sky may be clear and cloudless. As a protective
measure, many of the houses and orchards of the
Rh6ne valley and the Riviera have thick rows of
trees and hedges planted to shield them from the
Mistral.
A similar type of cold north-easterly wind expe-
rienced along the Adriatic coast is called the Bora.
Like the Mistral, it is caused by a difference in pres-
sure between continental Europe and the Mediter-
ranean. This usually occurs in winter, when the
atmospheric pressure over continental Europe is
higher than that of the Mediterranean Sea. The Bora
thus blows outwards into the Mediterranean. This
dry, icy wind is even more vio[ent than the Mistral
and speeds of over 160 km.p.h. (100 m.p.h.) have
been recorded. During strong Boras, ships may be
blown aground and agricultural lands devastated.
Tramontana and Gregale are similar cold winds of
the Mediterranean Sea.
Natural Vegetation
Mediterranean vegetation is of a transitional nature
between that of the hot desert and the temperate
forest. Trees, shrubs, grass or scrub may predomi-
nate depending upon local conditions. precipitation
is only moderate, between 38 mm (15 inches) and
890 mm (35 inches) and evaporation is high. Con-
sequently plant growth is not luxuriant. Trees with
small broad leaves are widely spaced and never
very tall. Though there are many branches they are
short and carry few leaves. The absence of shade is
a distinct feature of Mediterranean lands. Growth
is slow in the cooler and wetter season, even though
more rain comes in winter. Growth is thus almost
restricted to autumn and spring when the tempera-
ture is higher and moisture is just sufficient. The
long summer drought checks growth. One fact is
clear, plants whether trees or shrubs, evergreen or
deciduous, have to adapt themselves to a climatic
environment with a marked rhythmic recurrence of
rain and drought. In many ways, the vegetational
responses to climatic demands in the Mediterranean
are similar to those of the adjacent deserts and the
savanna further south. Plants are in a continuous
struggle against heat, dry air, excessive evaporation
and prolonged droughts. They are, in short, xero-
phytic, a word used to describe the drought-resistant
plants in environment deficient in moisture.
TYPES OF MEDITERRANEAN VEGETATION
Various kinds of vegetation are found in the Medi-
terranean regions.
1. Mediterranean evergreen forests. These are
open woodlands with evergreen oaks, of which the
cork oaks of Spain and Portugal are the best known.
They are found only in the climatically most
favoured regions with a rainfall of well over 635 mm
19.A The giant sequoia of California towers above the sur-
rou nd i n g tr ees Se rv i zi o Ed ito ri al e Fotog rafico

(25 inches). The trees are normally low, even
stunted, with massive trunks, deeply fissured barks,
small leathery leaves and wide-spreading root sys-
tem in search of water. The cork oaks are specially
valued for their thick barks, used for making wine-
bottle corks and for export around the world. In
Australia, the eucalyptus forests replace the ever-
green oak. The jarrah and karri trees are commer-
cially the most important. The giaht sequoia or
redwood is typical of the Californian trees (Plate
1e.A).
2. Evergreen coniferous trees. These include the
various kinds of pines, firs, cedars and cypresses
which have evergreen, needle-shaped leaves and
tall, straight trunks. They appear more on the cooler
highlands and where droughts are less severe. Defo-
restation has reduced their numbers considerably.
3. Mediterranean bushes and shrubs. This is per-
haps the most predominant type of Mediterranean
vesetation. Summers are so dry and hot that in
places forests give place to short, evergreen shrubs
and bushes. The low bushes grow in scattered
clumps and are often thorny. The more common
species are laurel, myrtle, lavender, arbutus and
rosemary, of which a number are strongly scented
or perfumed.
In many areas, due to Man's interference in forest
depletion, or to overgrazing, the original woodlands
degenerate into a scrub vegetation with scattered,
stunted trees and tall bushes. They are so different
from the ordinary woodland or the true desert scrub-
land that special names have been given to them to
distinguish their location in different parts of the
Mediterranean lands. This type of vegetation is
called maquis in southern France, and macchia in
Italy. In California, the term chaparral is used and
in Australia mallee scrub. In limestone uplands,
where the soil is extremely thin and the scrub dete-
riorates into highly xerophytic ground creepers, a
more exact term, garrigue, is used.
4. Grass. Conditions in the Mediterranean do not
suit grass, because most of the rain comes in the cool
season when growth is slow. Slow-growing vegeta-
tion, which cannot replenish its foliage readily, and
which is without deep-penetrating roots, is least
suited here. Even if grasses do survive, they are so
wiry and bunchy that they are not suitable for ani-
mal farming. Cattle rearing is thus unimportant in
the Mediterranean. The grass, which is replaced
by certain drought-resistant varieties of shrubs and
flowering herbs, can however support sheep or
goats. Even this form of grazing has done more harm
than good for it has promoted soil erosion and
impoverished the hill slopes of the Mediterranean.
Animal fats are not important here and the chief
cooking oil is obtained from olives. Dairy products
are net import items.
Economic Development of the
Mediterranean Regions
Despite the semi-arid conditions over many parts of
the Mediterranean lands, the climate as a whole is
favourable. Its warm, bright summers and cool,
moist winters enable a wide range of crops to be cul-
tivated. One must not forget that the Mediterranean
shore-lands were once the Cradle of Western Civi-
lization. Nowadays the area is important for fruit
cultivation, cereal growing, wine-making and agri-
cultural industries, as well as engineering and min-
ing. We shall deal with some of them in greater
detail below.
1. Orchard farming. The Mediterranean lands are
also known as the world's orchard lands. A wide
range of citrus fruits such as oranges, lemons, limes,
citrons and grapefruit are grown. The fruit trees
have long roots to draw water from considerable
depths during the long summer drought. In excep-
tionally dry area, irrigation helps to relieve the lack
of moisture. In the Great Valley of California, the
Vale of Chile, the Negev Desert of Israel and the
northern shores of Mediterranean Europe, an elab-
orate system of irrigation canals enables both fruits
and cereals to be successfully raised. The thick,
leathery skin of the citrus fruits prevents excessive
transpiration and,the long, sunny summer enables
the fruits to be ripened and harvested. The various
Mediterranean oranges are so distinctive in their
shape, size, taste and quality that they are called by
different names in their area of production. Of.the
Mediterranean oranges, perhaps, the best known
are the Sunkist oranges from California, exported
for table consumption and for making orange
squash. The Seville oranges of Spain are small but
very sweet and are particularly suitable for making
marmalade. Those from Israel, the Jaffa oranges,
are equally delicious and are specially grown for
export. In Tangiers, the tangerine is of great local
importance. [n the temperate monsoon lands of
China and Japan, which were, in fact, the native
home of the orange, commercial cultivation of the
fruit is less significant, and only in recent years has
there been any serious effort made to popularize
their export as 'mandarin oranges'. The Mediterra-
l8s

ffi: 
t---'
19.B Olive cultivation in Andalusia, Spain. The small,
gnarled trees are typical of the Mediterranean region. S.E F.
Torino
nean lands account for 70 per cent of the world's
exports of citrus fruits.
The olive tree is probably the most typical of all
Mediterranean cultivated vegetation (Plate 19.B). It
is so hardy and long-rooted that it can survive even
on very poor limestone soils with less than 250 mm
(10 inches) of annual rainfall. Like our coconut
palm, the olive tree is very 'versatile' and has many
uses. The olive can be eaten fresh or pickled with
spices. The fleshy part can be crushed and olive oil
extracted, a valuable source of cooking oil in a
region deficient in animal fat. Soap'and margarine
can also be made with the oil. Besides olives, many
nut trees like chestnuts, walnuts, hazelnuts and
almonds are grown and the nuts picked as fruits or
for the chocolate industry. Other important fruits
are peaches, apricots, pears, plums, cherries and
figs.
2. Crop cultivation. Besides orchard fruits, the
Mediterranean climate also supports many field
crops. Cereals are by far the most important. Wheat
is the leading food crop. Though conditions for
extensive wheat cultivation are not as ideal as those
of the cool temperate regions, the Mediterranean
farmers have utilized the seasonal climatic rhythm
to their best advantage. The wheat grown is mainly
hard, winter wheat.It is suitable for both bread-mak-
ing and other food-products such as macaroni, spa-
ghetti and vermicelli. The farmers usually sow the
seeds in autumn, so that they germinate and grow
steadily with the coming winter rain. By spring there
is still sufficient moisture for the wheat to mature.
The sunny weather of early summer ripens the grains
and the wheat is harvested in almost guaranteed
rainless weather. Barley is the next most popular
cereal.
Summer crops are raised only where irrigation is
possible. The water comes mainly from the melting
snow that feeds the many rivers whose sources are
in the highlands. Lowlands are intensively cultivated
and the hill slopes are terraced. In Spain and Italy,
the edges of the terraces are firmly piled with stones
to prevent any soil from being washed away. Gen-
erally speaking, farms are small but there are also
large holdings called haciendas in Spain which
engage large numbers of paid labourers to work the
farms. In a few localities, e.g. the Ebro basin in
Spain, the Po Valley in Italy, and in California, rice
has been successfully cultivated and their yields are
some of the highest in the world. In the more fertile
plains, vegetables, especially beans, and flowers are
grown for the local market. A little cotton and
l"
r86

tobacco are also grown. The mountain pastures, with
their cooler climate, support a few sheep, goats and
sometimes cattle. Transhumance is widely practised.
3. Wine production. This is another speciality of the
Mediterranean countries, because the best wine is
essentially made from grapes. Some 85 per cent of
grapes produced go into wine. The long, sunny
summer allows the grapes to ripen and then they are
hand-picked. Viticulture is by tradition a Mediter-
ranean occupation and the regions bordering the
Mediterranean Sea account for three-quarters of the
world's production of wine. In Spain, Portugal,
France and ltaly, wine is the national drink. The
average wine consumption of the Mediterranean
countries is about 68 litres (15 gallons) per head per
annum, whereas in the U.S.A. it is not even one-
twentieth as much!
Although grapes may be grown in many parts of
the temperate lands, commercial viticulture is
almost entirely confined to the Mediterranean
regions. It has been estimated that 40 million tonnes
of the world's total production of 46 million tonnes
of grapes annually are being processed into wine.
The quality of the fermented grape juice is decided
by a number of factors including the types of vine
grown, the quality of the soil, the climate of the
region, the method and extent of. fermentation. The
fragrance taste and quality of the final product is so
varied that the price range is tremendous. Wine may
be as cheap as any soft-drink or as expensive as
brandy. To differentiate the various kinds of wine,
the principal wine areas of the world maintain their
exclusive names. The wine from southern Spain is
called sherry, from Portugal port wine. Chianti, asti
and marsala come from different parts of Italy. In
19.C Grapes are grown in many Mediterranean countries'
In Turkey some are dried to make sultanas. They are washed
and then laid out in the sun. Popperfoto
France the greatest wine regions are located further
north, e.g. Champagne in the Paris basin, Bordeaux
in the Garonne basin, Burgundy in the Rh6ne-Sa6ne
valley.
The world trade in fresh grapes is comparatively
small mainly from Mediterranean South Africa.
Most of the inferior grapes are preserved as dried
grapes and exported. They are known by several
names, e.g. currants from the Levantine grapes,
raisins from California and sultanas from Turkey
(Plate 19.C).
The other industries associated with Mediterra-
nean agriculture are fruit canning, flour milling and
food processing.
Ouestions and Exercises
1. What is meant by the 'index plant' of a climatic
type? In what ways are the following index
plants representative of the type of climate 2.
indicated:
(a) teak-Tropical Monsoon Climate;
(b) olive-Mediterranean Climate;
(c) cactus-Hot Desert Climate;
(d) spruce-Cool Temperate Continental Cli-
mate.
The statistics on page lt'8 of the annual rainfall
.rnd annual temperature ranges of four Medi-
terranean lowland stations are taken from
the Mediterranean shorelands. Attempt to ex-
plain their differences.

Station
Latitude
Longitude
Annual
rainfall
Annual
temperature
range
(a) Gibraltar
(b) Marseilles
(c) Athens
(d) Alexandria
36"N
430N
3g'N
3 l'N
5"w
)t
24"E
30"E
914 mm (36")
584 mm (23")
406 mm (16")
203 mm ( 8")
1l"c (20"F.)
l6"c (28'F.)
l8"c (32"F.)
l3"c (23"F.)
(b)
4.
Outline the various types of natural vegetation
found in the Mediterranean regions. Relate this
to climate, soil and human interference.
Give an explanatory account of the following
statements about economic activities of the
Mediterranean lands:
(a) Orchard farming is the predominant occu-
pation.
(b) The chief cereal cultivated is hard. winter
wheat.
(c) Pastoral farming is of little importance.
5. Write geographical notes on any three of the fol-
lowing:
(a) The Mediterranean Climate is typified by
dry, sunny summers and wet. mild winters.
(b) Hot, dusty Sirocco and cold stormy Mistral.
(c) Mediterranean woodlands, shrubs and
scrub.
(d) Three-quarters of the world's wine comes
from the Mediterranean regions of Europe.
Sample Objective Ouestions
1. The Mediterranean type of climate
is unique and is found only in certain
parts of the world. Basically it is
caused by
A the rotation of the earth
B the shifting of the world's planet-
ary wind belts
C the alternate belts of low and
high pressure
D relief differences over the earth's
surface
2. Study the climatic statistics of the
two selected stations in the southern
hemisphere, Cape Town (South
Africa), in Fig. 19.3b on page 182
and Hobart (Tasmania) in Fig. 22.2b
on page 208. Their most contrasting
climatic feature is shown in their
A total annual precipitation
(c)
7. (a)
(b)
(c)
8. (a)
(b)
mean annual temperature range
mid-winter temperature
pattern of rainfall distriburion
3. Plants in the Mediterranean lands
have to withstand long periods of
drought during certain times of the
year. They do so in the following
ways except
A by having bulbous stems
B by sending out long roors in
search of groundwater
C by turning their broad leaves
away from the sun
D by reducing tiny leaves to thorns
and pricks
4. The Mediterranean climate is unique
because
A it receives most of its rain from
the westerlies in winter
6. (a) Why is the Mediterranean type of climate
so unique?
Which other parts of the world, besides the
Mediterranean shorelands of Europe, also
experience a similar type of climate?
Briefly describe its annual rhythm of tem-
perature and rainfall.
The Mediterranean vegetation includes for-
ests, woodlands, shrubs and grass. Why is
the vegetation so varied?
Shrubs of various types are very well-devel-
oped in Mediterranean lands. Name some
of the better known ones.
What uses have men made of the Mediter-
ranean vegetation?
Mediterranean lands are often referred to
as the 'world's orchard lands'. Why is
orchard farming so well-developed here?
Briefly describe the types of fruit cultivated
here.
(c) What other important crops can be found
in Mediterranean lands?
B
C
D
B it receives more sun than the
equatorial regions
C its mean annual temperature nev-
er falls below 21"C (70'F.)
D its annual temperature range is
comparable to that of Malaysia
5. Mediterranean vegetation can be
quite varied. Which of the following
aptly describes it?
I evergreen forest
.II luxuriant rain trees
III open woodland
IV scented scrubs
V mangrove swamps
VI coarse pastures
A I, III and VI
B I. II and IV
C I, III. IV and VI
D III, IV, V and VI

