Chapter 12 The Oceans
Exploring the Oceans
The oceans, comprising more than 70 per cent or 364
million sq km (140 million square miles) of the
earth's surface, have tremendous potential waiting
to be developed. Besides being a source of food -
fish, mammals, reptiles, salt and other marine
foodstuffs-the tides can be harnessed to provide
power. Formal oceanographic investigation began
only with the British expedition of the Challenger
(1873-6), the first successful world-wide deep-sea
expedition.
Oceanography, the science of the oceans, has
become such an important subject in recent years
that researches into the deep seas have been con-
ducted by many institutions, universities, govern-
ment ministries and other international organizations.
The most famous international oceanographic re-
search centre is the International Council for the
12.A Piston covers, such as this, are used to sample the
sediment on the ocean tloors Mohammad Ayob
Exploration of the Sea with its headquarters in
Copenhagen. Ocean exploration for the observation
and recording of oceanographic data is a very expen-
sive matter. It involves the operation and mainte-
nance of specially equipped vessels in mid-ocean for
long periods, and large-scale oceanographic researches
are thus best undertaken by international bodies.
The older echo-sounding techniques have now been
replaced by radar sounding and electrical echo
devices to find the precise depths of ocean floors and
map the relief of the oceans. Trained frog-men
equipped with modern breathing apparatus are
employed to gather valuable information from great
depths. Deep-sea core samples are obtained by bor-
ing for the study of the oceanic deposits-the various
kinds of ooze, mud and clay. Automatic-record-
ing thermometers and other sensitive instruments
can be lowered to any required depth by stationary
vessels with laboratory facilities for processing any

required data. For the observation and measure-
ment of current flow, various kinds of current meter
using propellers, vanes or pendulums have been
designed. Sealed bottles and other floating objects
containing instructions for reporting their precise
time and place of discovery are released in large
numbers to compute the rate and direction of drift
and current flow. With all these modern techniques
at the disposal of the oceanographers, our knowl-
edge of the mysteries of the oceans is greatly
increased. But there is still much to be discovered.
The Relief of the Ocean
The ocean basins are in many ways similar to the
land surface. There are submarine ridges, plateaux,
canyons, plains and trenches. A section drawn
across an ocean (Fig. 12.1) illustrates the typical
submarine relief features.
l. The continental shelf. This is, in fact, the sea-
ward extension of the continent from the shoreline
to the continental edge marked, approximately, by
the 100 fathom (180 metres/600 feet) isobath (iso-
baths are contours marking depths below sea-level).
The continental shelf is thus a shallow platform
whose width varies greatly, from a few kilometres
in the North Pacific off the continent of North
America, to over 160 km (100 miles) off north-west
Europe. In some places where the coasts are
extremely mountainous, such as the Rocky Moun-
tain and Andean coasts, the continental shelf may
be entirely absent. Off broad lowland coasts like
those of Arctic Siberia, a maximum width of
1 200 km (750 miles) has been recorded! A width of
32-1,60 km (20-100 miles) is generally encountered.
The angle of the slope is also variable, and is nor-
mally least where the continental shelf is widest. .A
gradient of 1 in 500 is common to most continental
shelves.
Many regard the continental shelf as part of the
continent submerged due to a rise in sea-level, e.g.
at the close of the Ice Age, when the ice in the tem-
perate latitudes melted and raised the sea-level by
several hundred metres. Some smaller continental
shelves could have been caused by wave erosion
where the land is being eroded by the sea as shown
in Fig. I2.2. Coiversely such shelves might have
been formed by the deposition of land-derived or
river-borne materials on the off-shore terrace as in
Fig. 12.3.
The continental shelves are of great geographical
significance for the following reasons:
(a) Their shallowness enables sunlight to pene-
trate through the water, which encourages the
growth of minute plants and other microscopic
organisms. They are thus rich in plankton on which
millions of surface and bottom-feeding fishes thrive.
The continental shelves are therefore the richest
fishing grounds in the world, e.g. the Grand Banks
off Newfoundland, the North Sea and the Sunda
Shelf.
(b) Their limited depth and gentle slope keep out
cold under-currents and increase the height of tides.
This sometimes hinders shipping and other marine
activities since ships can only enter and leave port
on the tide. Most of the world's greatest seaports
including Southampton, London, Hamburg, Rotter-
dam, Hong Kong and Singapore are located on
continental shelves.
Fig. 12.1 The relief of the ocean basin (a typical section)
with oceanic deposits - mud, clay and oozes.
sea level
90m
continental shelf
1,200
1,500 
continental slope
1,800
2,100
2,400
2,700
3.000
ocean deep
3.300
arine ridge

off-shore terrace
bontiriental shelf
'_-_-_:_2
-_:_---_:7
Fig. 12.2 Continental shelf formed by processes of erosion
2. The continental slope. At the edge of the conti-
nental shelf, there is an abrupt change of gradient
to about I in20, forming the continental slope.
3. The deep-sea plain. This is the undulating plain
lying two or three kilometres below sea-level, and
covering two-thirds of the ocean floor, generally
termed the abyssal plain. It was once thought to be
featureless, but modern sounding devices reveal that
the abyssal plain is farfrom being level. It has exten-
sive submarine plateaux, ridges, trenches, basins
and oceanic islands that rise above sea-level in the
midst of oceans, e.g. the Azores, Ascension Island.
4. The ocean deeps. These are the long, narrow
trenches that plunge as great ocean deeps to a depth
of 5,000 fathoms or 9 000 metres (30,000 feet)! Con-
trary to our expectations, most of the deepest
trenches are not located in the midst of oceans. They
are more often found close to the continents,
particularly in the Pacific Ocean, where several
deep trenches have been sounded. The great-
est known ocean deep is the Mariana Trench near
Guam Island, which is more than 10 900 metres
(36,000 feet) deep. We can see from this that ocean
trenches are greater in magnitude than the highest
mountains on land, for the highest peak, Mt. Everest
is only 8 848 metres (29,028 feet). Other notable
ocean deeps include the Mindanao Deep (10 700
metres/35,000 feet) the Tonga Trench (9 450
metrespl,000 feet) and the Japanese Trench (8 500
metresp8,000 feet) all in the Pacific Ocean.
The Deposits of the Ocean Floor
Materials eroded from the earth which are not
deposited by rivers or at the coast are eventually
dropped on the ocean floor. The dominant process
is slow sedimentation where the eroded particles very
slowly filter through the ocean water and settle upon
one another in layers. The thickness of the layer of
Fig. 12.3 Continental shelf formed by processes of deposi-
tion
sediments is still unknown. Its rate of accumulation
is equally uncertain. Generally speaking, we may
classify all the oceanic deposits as either muds, oozes
or clays.
l. The muds. These are terrigenous deposits be-
cause they are derived from land and are mainly
deposited on the continental shelves. The muds are
referred to as blue, green or red muds; their col-
ouring depends upon their chemical content.
2. The oozes. These are pelagic deposits because
they are derived from the oceans. They are made of
the shelly and skeletal remains of marine micro-
organisms with calcareous or siliceous parts. Oozes
have a very fine, flour-like texture and either occur
as accumulated deposits or float about in suspension.
3. The clays. These occur mainly as red clays in the
deeper parts of the ocean basins, and are particularly
abundant in the Pacific Ocean. Red clay is believed
to be an accumulation of volcanic dust blown out
from volcanoes during volcanic eruptions.
Salinity of the Ocean
Almost every known chemical element can be found
in varying proportions in the oceans whose most
characteristic feature is their salinity, in contrast to
the fresh water of lakes and streams. All sea water
contains large amounts of dissolved mineral matter
of which sodium chloride or common salt alone con-
stitutes more than 77 per cent. The other more
important compounds include magnesium, calcium
and potassium, while the rest are distinguishable
only in traces of very minute quantities. Due to the
free movement of ocean water, the proportions of
different salts remain remarkably constant in all
oceans and even to great depths. But the degree of
concentration of the salt solution in oceans does vary
appreciably in different areas. This is expressed as
salinity, the degree of saltiness of water, either as a

!ou., 37 "loo !se-ez %. [ffilas-eo "L. lsz-ss"/.. lsz-zo"l". f]und er 2o"loo
Fig. 12.4 World map showing the salinity of oceans (Note
the highest salinity is found in enclosed seas and those
adjoining the hot deserts along the tropics.)
percentage or more often in parts per thousand.
Variations are shown in salinity distribution maps by
isohalines, lines joining places having an equal
degree of salinity.
Generally speaking, the average salinity of the
oceans is 35.2 per thousand, about 35 parts of salt
in 1 000 parts of water. In the Baltic Sea, where
there is much dilution by fresh water and melting ice,
the salinity is much lower, only about 7 per thou-
sand. In the Red Sea where there is much surface
evaporation and fewer rivers to bring in fresh water,
the average salinity increases to 39 per thousand. In
enclosed seas, which are areas of inland drainage,
such as the Caspian Sea, the salinity is very high, 180
per thousand, and in the Dead Sea of Israel,/Jordan,
a salinity of 250 per thousand has been recorded.
The highest salinity is perhaps, that of Lake Van, in
Turkey, with 330 per thousand. It is a salt lake, and
salts are collected from its shores. The density of the
water is so high that in Lake Van or the Dead Sea,
it is almost impossible to sink. Beginner-swimmers
will find it much easier to float here than anywhere
else! The variation of salinitv in the various seas
and oceans is affected by the following factors
(Fig. 12.4):
l. The rate of evaporation. The waters fringing the
High Pressure Belts of the Trade Wind Deserts,
between 20' and 30" N and S, have high salinity
because of the high rate of evaporation caused by
high temperature and low humidity. The temperate
oceans have lower salinity due to the lower temper-
ature and a lower rate of evaporation.
2. The amount of fresh water added by precipitation,
streams and icebergs. Salinity is lower than the
average 35 per thousand in equatorial waters
because of the heavy rainfall and high relative
humidity. Oceans into which huge rivers like the
Amazon, Zaire, Ganges, Irrawaddy and Mekong
drain, have much of their saltiness diluted and have
a lower salinity. The Baltic, Arctic and Antarctic
waters have a salinity of less than 32 per thousand
because of the colder climate with little evaporation
and because much fresh water is added from the
melting of icebergs, as well as by several large pole-
ward-bound rivers, e.g. Ob, Lena, Yenisey and
Mackenzie.

3. The degree of water mixing by currents. In
wholly or partially enclosed seas such as the Caspian
Sea, Mediterranean Sea, Red Sea and Persian Gulf,
the waters do not mix freely with the ocean water
and they are not penetrated by ocean currents. Sal-
inity is high, often over 37 per thousand. In areas of
inland drainage without links with the oceans, con-
tinuous evaporation under an almost cloudless sky
causes the accumulation of salt around the shores.
In the open oceans where currents freely flow, sal-
inity tends to be near the average 35 per thousand
or even a little lower. The range of salinity is neg-
ligible where there is free mixing of water. by surface
and sub-surface currents.
The Temperature of Ocean Water
Like land masses, ocean water varies in temperature
from place to place both at the surface and at great
depths. Since water warms up and cools down much
more slowly than the land, the annual range of tem-
perature in any part of the ocean is very much
srnaller. It is less than 5.5 'C (10 "F) for most of the
open seas. Generally, the mean annual temperature
Fig: 12.5 World map showing the surface temperatures of
oceans (Note the ocean temperatures decrease from the
tropics to temperate waters)
of the surface ocean water decreases from about
2l "C (70 'F) in equatorial areas to 13 oC (55 "F) at
latitudes 45" N and S, and drops almost to freezing-
point at the poles. The reduction of temperature
with latitude is however never constant, because of
the interference by warm and cold currents, winds
and air masses. Unlike the solid earth, ocean water
is mobile and variations in the temperature between
different parts of the oceans can be expected. Water
flowing out from the Arctic and Antarctic as cold
currents, such as the Labrador Current off north-
east Canada, tends to reduce the surface-water tem-
perature. Ports of eastern Canada even at 45oN are
thus icebound for almost half the year. In the same
way, coasts warmed by warm currents, such as the
North Atlantic Drift, have their surface temperature
raised. The Norwegian coast, even at latitudes 60'
to 70" N is ice-free throughout the year!
The highest water temperatures are found in
enclosed seas in the tropics, e.g. the Red Sea which
records a temperature of 29" to 38'C (85'to 100 "F).
The Arctic and Antaritic waters are so cold that
their surface is permanently frozen as pack-ice down
to a depth of several metres. In the warmer summer,
bo- I soc
(41"-5go F )
lllou,, 2s"c t77"Ft f l;;-'i;9r,
[Tunaer s'c (41'F]

parts of the ice break off as ice floes that both dilute
the water and lower the surface temperature of sur-
rounding ice-free seas (Fig. 12,5).
The temperature of the oceans also varies verti-
cally with increasing depth. It decreases rapidly for
the first 2fi) fathoms, at the rate of 1 "C for every 18
fathoms (1 "F for every 1.0 fathoms) and then more
slowly until a depth of 500 fathoms is reached.
Beyond this, the drop is scarcely noticeable, less
than 1 oC for every L80 fathoms (or 1 'F tbr every
100 fathoms). In the ocean deeps below 2,000
fathoms (3 700 metres/12,000 feet) the water is uni-
formly cold, just a little above freezing point. It is
interesting to note that even in the deepest ocean
trenches, more than 10 km (6 miles) below the sur-
face, the water never freezes. It is estimated that
over 80 per cent of all ocean waters have a tempera-
ture between 2 "C (35 "F) and 4 oC (40 "F).
The Movements of Ocean Currents
Ocean currents are large masses of surface water
that circulate in regular patterns around the oceans,
as shown in the world map in Fig. 12.6. Those that
flow from equatorial regions polewards have a
Fig. 12.6 Ocean currents of the world
higher surface temperature and are warm currents.
Those that flow from polar regions equatorwards
have a lower surface temperature and are cold cur-
rents. Their direction of movement is indicated by
the arrows. But why should they follow such a pat-
tern? Some of the underlying factors are explained
below.
1. The planetary winds. Between the equator and
the tropics, the Trade lilinds move equatorial waters
polewards and westwards and warm the eastern
coasts of continents. For example, the North-East
Trade Winds move the North Equatorial Current
and its derivatives, the Florida Current and the Gulf
Stream Drift to warm the southern and eastern
coasts of the U.S.A. Similarly, the South-East Trade
Winds drive the South Equatorial Current which
warms the eastern coast of Brazil as the warm
Brazilian Current.
In the temperate latitudes blow the Westerlies.
Though they are less reliable than the Trade Winds,
they result in a north-easterly flow of water in the
northern hemisphere, so that the warm Gulf Stream
is driven to the western coast of Europe as the North
Atlantic Drift. In a similar manner, the Westerlies
of the southern hemisphere, drive the West Wind
+ 
warm currents
-_-+coldcurrents
61;il$
Arctic Circle
i4\
d""'
P
K--),
North ij
Atlantic ?
ocean 8.1
-€rn-"*l'll
". $t ,i\
S' 
P
f"""3
Ocean. S,\
23|.N. :la}
Current
N.E. i/bn|oon Drift
-- 
-- 
h 
----
Trodc ol Crl
a'
),
OrFoutarrE-0iTdiu-rrrnt.-
(--.-\
S.W. Monsoon Orifi
'-'::--/::2
2+"S.J:t':{3ej'Y: - - 31
nrl
t 
South Pacific O"""n i
' 
"",'1
South
Atlantic
Ocean
** *,")t.-.
Ocean E.f
-- - 
EEI
'-r-
*r-sg::
W93t Wittd
rl
t 
t,
t 
_ 
l_a .$->
(l/1ijj::jfr 
E 
-s1za.
,-r 
.::: 6r, .S,/ (/
.Y 
L/
d Drift
Scale I : 215,OOO,OOO

Drift equatorwards as the Peruvian Current off
South America and the Benguela Current off south-
ern Africa. The planetary winds are probably the
dominant influence on the flow of ocean currenrs.
The strongest evidence of prevailing winds on cur-
rent flows is seen in the North Indian Ocean. Here
the direction of the currents changes completely with
the direction of the monsoon winds which come from
the north-east in winter and south-west in summer.
2. Temperatures. There is much difference in the
temperature of ocean waters at the equator and at
the poles. As warm water is lighter and rises, and
cold water is denser and sinks, warm equatorial
waters move slowly along the surface polewards,
while the heavier cold waters of the polar regions
creep slowly along the bottom of the sea equator-
wards.
3. Salinity. The salinity of ocean water varies from
place to place. Waters of high salinity are denser
than waters of low salinity. Hence waters of low sal-
inity flow on the surface of waters of high salinity
while waters of high salinity flow at the bottom
towards waters of low salinity. For example in the
Mediterranean region, there is great difference in
salinity between the waters of the open Atlantic and
those of the partially enclosed Mediterranean Sea.
The less saline water of the Atlantic flows on the
surface into the Mediterranean, and this is compen-
sated for by an outflow of denser bottom water from
the Mediterranean (Fig. 12.a).
4. The earth's rotation. The earth's rotation deflects
freely moving objects, including ocean currenrs, ro
the right. In the northern hemisphere this is a clock-
wise direction (e.g. the circulation of the Gulf
Stream Drift and the Canaries Current). In the south-
ern hemisphere it is an anti-clockwise direction (e.g.
the Brazilian Current.and the West Wind Drift).
5. Land. A land mass always obstructs and diverts a
current. For instance, the tip of southern Chile
diverts part of the West Wind Drift northwards as
the Peruvian Current. Similarly the 'shoulder' of
Brazil at Cape Sao Roque, divides the west flowing
equatorial currents into the Cayenne Current which
flows north-westwards and the Brazilian Current
which flows south-westwards.
The Circulation of the Atlantic Ocean
Let us now study more closely the circulation of
ocean currents in the Atlantic Ocean. We shall begin
with the North and South Equatorial Current at the
equator. The steady Trade Winds constantly drift
two streams of water from east to west. At the
'shoulder' of north-east Brazil, the protruding land
mass splits the South Equatorial Current into the
Cayenne Current which flows along the Guiana
coast, and the Brazilian Current which flows south-
wards along the east coast of Brazil.
In the North Atlantic Ocean, the Cayenne Current
is joined and reinforced by the North Equatorial
Current and heads north-westwards as a large mass
of equatorial water into the Caribbean Sea. Part of
the current enters the Gulf of Mexico and emerges
from the Florida Strait between Florida and Cuba
as the Florida Current. The rest of the eouatorial
water flows northwards east of the Antillei to join
the Gulf Stream off the south-eastern U.S.A. The
Gulf Stream Drift is one of the strongest ocean cur-
rents, 56 to 160 km (35 to 100 miles) wide, 610
metres (2,000 feet) deep and with a velocity of 5 km
(3 miles) an hour. The current hugs the coast of
America as far as Cape Hatteras (latitude 35' N)
where it is deflected eastwards under the combined
influence of the Westerlies and the rotation of the
earth. It reaches Europe as the North Aflantic
Drift. This current, flowing at 16 km (10 miles) per
day, carries the warm equatorial water for over a
thousand kilometres to the coasts of Europe. From
the North Atlantic, it fans out in three directions,
eastwards to Britain, northwards to the Arctic and
southwards along the Iberian coast, as the cool Can-
aries Current. Oceanographic researches show that
almost two-thirds of the water brought by the Gulf
Stream to the Arctic regions is returned annually to
the tropical latitudes by dense, cold polar water that
creeps southwards in the ocean depths. The Canar-
ies Current flowing southwards eventually merges
with the North Equatorial Current, completing the
clockwise circuit in the North Atlantic Ocean.
Within this ring of currents, an area in the middle
of the Atlantic has no perceptible current. A large
amount of floating seaweed gathers and the area is
called the Sargasso Sea.
Apart from the clockwise circulation of the cur-
rents, there are also currents that enter the North
Atlantic from the Arctic regions. These cold waters
are blown south by the out-flowing polar winds. The
Irminger Current or East Greenland Current flows
between Iceland and Greenland and cools the
North Atlantic Drift at the point of convergence.
The cold Labrador Current drifts south-eastwards
between West Greenland and Baffin Island to meet
fhe warm Gulf Stream off Newfoundland, as far
ll0

south as 50" N where the icebergs carried south by
the Labrador Current melt.
The South Atlantic Ocean follows the same pattern
of circulation as the North Atlantic Ocean. The
major differences are that the circuit is anti-clock-
wise and the collection of seaweeds in the still waters
of the mid-South Atlantic is not so distinctive.
Where the South Equatorial Current is split at
Cape Sao Roque, one branch turns south as the
warm Brazilian Current. Its deep blue waters are
easily distinguishable from the yellow, muddy waters
carried hundreds of kilometres out to sea by the
Amazon further north. At about 40" S the influence
of the prevailing Westerlies and the rotation of the
earth propel the current eastwards to merge with the
cold West Wind Drift as the South Atlantic Current.
On reaching the west coast of Africa the current is
diverted northwards as the cold Benguela Current
(the counterpart of the Canaries Current). It brings
the cold polar waters of the West Wind Drift into
tropical latitudes. Driven by the regular South-East
Trade Winds, the Benguela Current surges equator-
wards in a north-westerly direction to join the South
Equatorial Current. This completes the circulation
of the currents in the South Atlantic. Between the
North and South Equatorial Currents is the east-
flowing Equatorial Counter Current.
The Girculation of the Pacific Ocean
The pattern of circulation in the Pacific is similar to
that of the Atlantic except in modifications which
can be expected from the greater size and the more
open nature of the Pacific. The circulation can be
easily followed in Fig. 12.6. Try to correlate it with
the currents in the Atlantic.
The North Equatorial Current flows westwards
with a compensating Equatorial Counter Current
running in the opposite direction. Due to the greater
expanse of the Pacific and the absence of an
obstructing land mass the volume of water is very
much greater than that of the Atlantic Equatorial
Current. The North-East Trade Winds blow the
North Equatorial Current off the coasts of the Phil-
ippines and Taiwan into the East China Sea as the
Kuroshio or Kuro Siwo or Japan Current. Its warm
waters are carried polewards as the North Pacific
Drift, keeping the ports of the Alaskan coast ice-free
in winter. The cold Bering Current or Alaskan Cur-
rent creeps southwards from the narrow Bering
Strait and is joined by the Okhotsk Current to meet
the warm Japan Current as the Oyashio, off Hok-
kaido. The cold water eventually sinks beneath the
warmer waters of the North Pacific Drift. Part of it
drifts southwards as the cool Californian Current
along the coasts of the western U.S.A. and coalesces
with the North Equatorial Current to complete the
clockwise circulation.
The current system of the South Pacific is the same
as that of the South Atlantic. The South Equatorial
Current, driven by the South-East Trade winds,
flows southwards along the coast of Queensland as
the East Australian Current, bringing warm equa-
torial waters into temperate waters. The current
turns eastwards towards New Zealand under the full
force of the Westerlies in the Tasman Sea and
merges with part of the cold West Wind Drift as the
South Pacific Current. Obstructed by the tip of
southern Chile, the current turns northwards along
the western coast of South America as the cold
Humboldt or Peruvian Current. The cold water
chills any wind that blows on shore so that the Chi-
lean and Peruvian coasts are practically rainless. The
region is rich in microscopic marine plants and ani-
mals that attract huge shoals of fish. Consequently,
millions of sea-birds gather here to feed on the fish.
Their droppings completely whiten the coastal cliffs
and islands, forming thick deposits of. guano, a valu-
able source of fertilizer. The Peruvian Current eventu-
ally links up with the South Equatorial Current and
completes the cycle of currents in the South Pacific.
The Indian Ocean Circulation
As in the other oceans as illustrated in Fig. 12.6, the
currents of the South Indian Ocean form a circuit.
The Equatorial Current, turning southwards past
Malagasy as the Agulhas or Mozambique Current,
merges with the West Wind Drift, flowing eastwards
and turns equatorwards as the West Australian
Current.
In the North Indian Ocean, there is a complete
reversal of the direction of currents between summer
and winter, due to the changes of monsoon winds.
In summer from June to October, when the domi-
nant winds is the South-West Monsoon, the currents
are blown from a south-westerly direction as the
South-West Monsoon Drift. This is reversed in win-
ter, beginning from December, when the North-East
Monsoon blows the currents from the north-east as
the North-East Monsoon Drift. The currents of the
North Indian Ocean, demonstrate most convincingly
the dominant effects of winds on the circulation of
ocean currents.
lll

Ouestions and Exercises
1. With the aid of large sketch maps, describe and 
(a) The richest fishing grounds are located on
explain the circulation of currents in either the 
continental shelves.
Atlantic or the Pacific Ocean. Your map should 
(b) The average salinity of the Baltic Sea is only
differentiate clearly the warm currents from the 
7 per thousand whereas that of the Dead
cold currents. 
Sea is 250 per thousand.
2. Explain by reference to actual examples the 
(c) The temperature of ocean water varies both
effects of ocean currents on: 
horizontally and vertically.
(a) climate; 
(d) The dominant influence on the circulation
(b) navigation; 
of ocean currents is wind.
(c) economic activities. 
5. Write brief notes on any three of the following
3. What is meant by the relief of the oceans? In 
terms associated with the oceans:
what ways are the structure and composition of 
(a) deep-sea core samples;
the relief different from those of the land sur- 
(b) oceanography;
face? 
(c) isohalines;
4. Give a reasoned explanation of any three of the 
(d) Gulf Stream Drift;
following: 
(e) Sargasso Sea.
rt2

