Chapter 7 Arid or Desert Landforms
Types of Desert
About a .fifth of the world's land is made up of
deserts - some rockv. others stonv and thc rest
sanclv. Deserts that are absolutelv barren and wherc
ntlthing grows at all are rare anci they are bctter
krrown as'trua deserts'.
If you look at the u'orld map carcfully, you will
find that there is a certain delinite pattern to the
location of the world's deserts. You wtll realize that
irlmost all the deserts are confinecl within the 15" to
30" parallels of latitude north and south of the equa-
7.A A sandy desert area (erg) in Death Valley, California
U.S. I nform ati o n Service
tor. 'fhey lie in the trade wind belt on the western
parts of the continents where Trade Winds are off-
shore. They are bathed by cold currents which pro-
duce a 'desiccating effect' so that moisture is not eas-
if y ccrndensed into precipitation. Dryness or aridity is
the key note. Such deserts are tropical hot deserts
or 'Trade Wind deserts'. They include the great
Sahara Desert; Arabian. lranian and Thar Deserts;
Kalahari, Namib and Atacama Deserts; the Greht
Australian Desert and the deserts of south-west
U.S.A.. and northern Mexico. In the continental
interiors of the mid-latitudes. the deserts such as the
"-'-" 
" 
l
- 
--:**t*.,
L-\,*
*: *\
\3f

Gobi and Turkestan are characterized by extremes
of temperatures (Fig. 18.1).
The work of winds and water in eroding elevated
uplands, transporting the worn-off materials and
depositing them elsewhere, has given rise to five dis-
tinct kinds of desert landscape.
l. Hamada or rocky desert. This consists of large
stretches of bare rocks, swept clear of sand and dust
by the wind. The exposed rocks are thoroughly
smoothed and polished. The region is bare and ster-
ile. The best known rocky deserts are those of the
Sahara Desert, e.g. the Hamada el Homra, in Libya,
which covers an area of almost 52 000 sq km (20,000
square miles).
2. Reg or stony desert. This is composed of exten-
sive sheets of angular pebbles and gravels which the
winds are not able to blow off. Such stony deserts
are much more accessible than the sandy deserts,
and large herds of camels are kept there. In Libya
and Egypt the term serir is used; elsewhere in
Africa, stony deserts are called reg.
3. Erg or sandy desert. This is a sea of sand which
typifies the popular idea of desert scenery. Winds
deposit vast stretches of undulating sand-dunes in
the heart of the deserts. The intricate patterns of
ripples on the dune surfaces indicate the direction
of the winds (Plate 7.A). The Calanscio Sand Sea in
7.8 The Badlands of Dakota is a good example of extensive
soil erosion brought about by climatic conditions and the
nature of the soil. Popperfoto
Libya is characteristic of a sandy desert. In Turkes-
tan, sandy deserts are also known as koum.
4. Badlands. The term 'badlands'was first given to
an arid area in South Dakota, U.S.A., where the
hills were badly eroded by occasional rain-storms
into gullies and ravines (Plate 7.B). The extent of
water action on hill slopes and rock surfaces was so
great that the entire region was abandoned by the
inhabitants. Deserts with similar features are now
referred to as badlands, e.g. the Painted Desert of
Arizona, which lies south-east of the Grand Canyon
of the Colorado River.
5. Mountain deserts. Some deserts are found on
highlands such as plateaux and mountain ranges.
Erosion has dissected the desert highlands into
harsh, serrated outlines of chaotic peaks and craggy
ranges. Their steep slopes are cut by wadis (steep-
sided, often dry, valleys) and the action of frost has
carved out sharp, irregular edges. In the Sahara
Desert, the Ahaggar Mountains and the Tibesti
Mountains are good examples of desert mountains.
The Mechanics of Arid Erosion
Arid landfonns are the result of a combination of
factors, one reacting upon the other. Insufficient
rainfall, often less than L27 mm (5 inches), coming

at most irregular periods, coupled with very high
temperatures (31"C/87"F. is the average) and a rapid
rate of evaporation, are the chief causes of aridity.
Sub-aerial denudation through the processes of
weathering (mechanical and chemical), wind action
and the work of water have combined to produce a
desert landscape that is varied and distinctive.
1. Weathering. This is the most potent factor in
reducing rocks to sand in arid regions. Even though
the amount of rain that falls in the desert is small,
some manage to penetrate into the rocks and set
up chemical reactions in the various minerals.
Intense heating during the day and rapid cooling at
night by radiation, set up stresses in the already
weakened rocks so that they eventually crack. As
heat penetrates rocks slowly when the outer surface
of rocks is being heated by the hot sun, the inner
rocks remain quite cool. The heating of the rocks
causes the outer surface to expand. The hot outer
surface prises itself off from the inner rocks by peel-
ing off in successive thin layers from the surface.
Such an onion-peeling process of mechanical weath-
ering is called exfoliation. Angular rock debris is
found in abundance as screes at the foot of upstand-
ing rocks. Similarly, when water gets into the cracks
and joints of rocks and the temperature at night
suddenly drops to below freezing point, the water
freezes and therefore expands by 10 per cent of its
volume. Successive freezing will prise off fragments
of rock which accumulate as screes. These rock
fragments become the 'teeth' or tools of wind ero-
sion. (See Chapter 4-Weathering)
2. Action of winds in deserts. The wind, though not
the most effective agent of erosion, transportation
and deposition, is more efficient in arid than in
humid regions. Since there is little vegetation or
moisture to bind the loose surface materials, the
effects of wind erosion are almost unrestrained.
Wind erosion is carried out in the following ways:
(a) Deflation. This involves the lifting and blowing
away of loose materials from the ground. Such un-
consolidated sand and pebbles may be carried in
the air or rolled along the ground depending on the
grain size. The finer dust and sand may be removed
kilometres away from their place of origin, and be
deposited even outside the desert margins. Defla-
tion results in the lowering of the land surface to
form large depressions called deflatlon hollows. The
Qattara Depression of the Sahara Desert lies
almost 135 metres (450 feet) below sea-level.
(b)'Abrasion. The sand-blasting of rock surfaces by
winds when they hurl sand particles against them is
7.C Curious-shaped desert landforms emerge as a result of
wind erosion. Servizio Edibriale Fotografico
called abrasion. The impact of such blasting results
in rock surfaces being scratched, polished and worn
away. Abrasion is most effective at or near the base
of rocks, where the amount of material the wind is
able to carry is greatest. This explains why telegraph
poles in the deserts are protected by a coveriug of
metal a metre or two above the ground. A great
variety of desert features are produced by abrasion.
(c) Attrition. When wind-borne particles roll against
one another in collision they wear each other away
so that their sizes are greatly reduced and grains are
rounded into millet seed sand. This process is called
attrition.
Landforms of Wind Erosion in Deserts
In the'combined processes of abrasion, deflation and
attrition, a wealth of characteristic desert land-
forms emerge (Plate 7.C).
1. Rock pedestals or mnshroom rocks. The sand-
blasting effect of winds against any projecting rock
masses wears back the softer layers so that an irreg-
ular edge is formed on the alternate bands of hard
and soft rocks. Grooves and hollows are cut in the
rock surfaces, carving them into fantastic and gro-
tesque-looking pillars called roch pedestals (Fig. 7.1).
Such rock pillars will be further eroded near their
bases where the friction is greatest. This process of
under-cutting produces rocks of mushroom shape
called mushroom rocks or gour in the Sahara.
2. Zetgen. These are tabular masses which have a
layer of soft rocks lying beneath a surface layer of
more resistant rocks. The sculpting effects of wind
abrasion wear them into a weird-looking'ridge and

--=--
undercutting
by wind
{i^",'i
Fig.7.1 Rock pedestals or gour
Fig.7.2 Zeugen (with horizontal strata of hard and soft
rocks)
furrow' landscape. Mechanical weathering initiates
their formation by opening up joints of the surface
rocks. Wind abrasion further 'eats' into the under-
lying softer layer so that deep furrows are devel-
oped. The hard rocks then stand above the furrows
as ridges or zeugen (Fig. 7.2), and many even over-
hang. Such tabular blocks of zeugen may stand 3 to
30 metres (10 to 100 feet) above the sunken furrows.
Continuous abrasion by wind gradually lowers the
zeugen and widens the furrows.
3. Yardangs. Quite similar to the'ridge and furrow'
landscape of zeugen are the steep-sided yardangs.
Instead of lying in horizontal strata upon one
another, the hard and soft rocks of yardangs are ver-
tical bands and are aligned in the direction of the
prevailing winds. Wind abrasion excavates the bands
of softer rocks into long, narrow corridors, separat-
ing the steep-sided overhanging ridges of hard rocks,
called yardangs (Fig. 7.3). They are commonly
found in the Atacama Desert. Chile. but the more
Fig. 7.3 Yardangs (with vertical bands
rocksl
hard and soft
spectacular ones with yardangs rising to 8-L5 metres
(25-50 feet) are best developed in the interior'deserts
of Central Asia where the name originated.
4. Mesas and buttes. Mesa is a Spanish word mean-
ing 'table'. It is a flat, table-like land mass with a
very resistant horizontal top layer, and very steep
sides. The hard stratum on the surface resists den-
udation by both wind and water, and thus protects
the underlying layers of rocks from being eroded
away. Mesas may be formed in canyon regions, e.g.
Arizona, or on fault blocks, e.g. the Table Mountain
of Cape Town, South Africa. Continued denudation
through the ages may reduce mesa in area so that
they become isolated flat-topped hills called buttes.
Many of them in arid countries are separated by
deep gorges or canyons (Fig.7.a and Plate 7.D).
5. Inselberg. This is a German word meaning
'island-mountain'. They are isolated residual hills ris-
ing abruptly from the level ground. They are char-
acterized by their very steep slopes and rather
rounded tops. They are often composed of granite
or gneiss, and are probably the relics of an original
plateau which has been almost entirely eroded away
(Plate 7.E). Inselbergs are typical of many desert
Fig.7.4 Mesa and butte
MESA
CLIFF BENCH
CANYON

Fig. 7.5 Round-topped, steep-sided inselbergs
and semi-arid landscapes in old age, e.g. those of
northern Nigeria, Western Australia and the Kala-
hari Desert (Fig. 7.5).
6. Ventifacts or dreikanter. These are pebbles
fateted by sand-blasting. They are shaped and
thoroughly polished by wind abrasion to sha'pes
resembling Brazil nuts. Rock fragments, mechani-
cally weathered from mountains and upstanding
rocks, are moved by wind and smoothed on the
windward side. If wind direction changes another
facet is developed. Such rocks have characteristic
flat facets with sharp edges. Amongst the ventifacts
those with three wind-faceted surfaces are called
dreikanter. Thdse wind-faceted pebbles form the
desert pavement, a smooth, mosaic-like region,
7.E Ayers Rock, an inselberg in the Australian Desert
Austral ia n Tou rist Com m ission
7.D The Grand Canyon of Arizona with its surrounding
mesas and buttes SeryEio Editoriale Fotografico
closely covered by the numerous rock fragments and
pebbles.
7. Deflation hollows. Winds lower the ground by
blowing away the unconsolidated materials, and
small depressions may form. Similarly, minor fault-
ing can also initiate depressions and the eddying
action of on-coming winds will wear off the weaker
rocks until the water-table is reached. Water then

seeps out forming oases or swarnps, in the deflation
hollows or depressions. The Faiyum Depression in
Egypt lies 40 metres (130 feet) below sea-level.
Large areas in western U.S.A., stripped of their nat-
ural vegetation for farming were completely deflated
when strong winds moved materials as dust storms,
laying waste crops and creating what is now known
as the Great Dust Bowl. In a dust.storm, winds may
lift dust hundreds of metres high and carry it thou-
sands of kilometres awav.
Landforms of Wind Deposition in
Deserts
Materials eroded and transported by winds must
come to rest somewhere. The finest dust travels
enormous distances in the air, and may be moved
completely out of the desert. It has been estimated
that some dust grains travel as far as 3 700 km (2,300
miles) before they are finally deposited on land or
sea. The dust from the Sahara Desert is sometimes
blown across the Mediterranean to fall as'blood
rains' in Italy or on the glaciers of Switzerland. Dust
that settles in the Huang He (Hwang Ho) basin from
the Gobi Desert has accumulated over past centuries
to a depth of several hundred metres! As wind-borne
materials are sifted according to their coarseness, it
can be expected that the coarser sands will be too
heavy to be blown out of the desert limits. They
remain as dunes or other depositional landforms
within the deserts themselves. Since they are rarely
static, their migration pattern depends on a number
of factors: the size of the particles they contain, the
direction and velocity of the winds, the location and
nature of the surfaces over which the particles are
transported and the presence or absence of water
and natural vegetation.
The following are some of the major features of
wind deposition:
1. Dunes. Dunes are, in fact, hills of sand formed
by the accumulation of sand and shaped by the
movement of winds. They may be active or live
dunes, constantly on the move, or inactive fixed
dunes, rooted with vegetation. Dunes are most well
represented in the erg desert where a sea of sand is
being continuously moved, reshaped and redepos-
ited into a variety of features. Because of their great
contrast in shape, size and alignment, they have
been given a long list of fanciful names, such as
attached dune or head dune, tail dune, advanced
dune, lateral dune, wake dune, star dune, pyramidal
dune, sword dune, parabolic blow-out dune, hairpin
tuture position of tho bsrchan
Fig.7.6 Crescentic sand dune-barchan
dune, smoking dune and transverse dune. However,
the following two types of common dune, barchans
and seifs, will be described in more detail.
(a) Barchan (Barkhan). These are crescentic
dunes which occur individually or in groups. They
are live dunes which advance steadily before winds
that come from a particular prevailing direction.
They are most prevalent in the deserts of Turkestan
and in the Sahara. Barchans are initiated probably
by a chance accumulation of sand at an obstacle,
such as a patch of grass or a heap of rocks. They
occur transversely to the wind, so that their horns thin
out and become lower in the direction of the
wind due to the reduced frictional retardation of the
winds around edges. The windward side is convex
and gently-sloping while the leeward side, being shel-
tered, is concave and steep (the slip-face) (Fig. 7.6).
The crest of the sand dune moves forward as more
sand is accumulated by the prevailing wind. The
sand is driven up the windward side and, on reaching
the crest, slips down the leeward side so that the
dune advances. The rate of advancement varies from
8 metres (25 feeQ a year for the high dunes mea-
suring up to 30 metres (100 feet) high to 15 metres
(50 feet) ayear, for the lower dunes which may be
only a dozen metres high.
The migration of the barchans may be a threat to
desert life for they may encroach on an oasis burying
palm trees or houses. Long-rooted sand-holding
trees and grasses are therefore planted to halt.the
advance of the dunes thus preventing areas of fertile
land from being devastated. Under the action of
winds, barchani take a chaotic changing pattern.
Several barchans may coalesce into a line or irreg-
ular ridges, ever-changing with the direction of the
winds. Ergs or sandy deserts are thus most difficult
to cross.

Fig.7.7 Longitudinal dunes-seifs
(b) Serls or longitudinal dunes. Seif is an Arabic
word meaning'sword'. They are long, narrow ridges
of sand, often over a hundred kilometres long lying
parallel to the direction of the prevailing winds. The
high serrated ridges may attain a height of over 60
metres (200 feet). The crestline of the seif rises and
falls in alternate peaks and saddles in regular succes-
sions like the teeth of a monstrous saw. The domi-
nant winds blow straight along the corridor between
the lines of dunes so that they are swept clear of sand
and remain smooth. The eddies that are set up blow
towards the sides of the corridor, and, having less
power, drop the sand to form the dunes. In this marr-
ner, the prevailing winds increase the length of the
dunes into tapering linear ridges while the occasional
cross winds tend to increase their height and width.
Extensive seif dunes are found in the Sahara Desert,
south of the Qattara Depression; the Thar Desert
and the West Australian Desert (Fig. 7.7).
2. Loess. The fine dust blown beyond the desert
limits is deposited on neighbouring lands as loess. It
is a yellow, friable material and is usually very fer-
tile. Loess is in fact, fine loam, rich in lime, very
coherent and extremely porous. Water sinks in read-
ily so. that the surface is always dry. Streams have
cut deep valleys through the thick mantle of soft
loess and badland topography may develop. It is so
soft that roads constructed through a loess region
soon sink and their walls rise steeply.
The most extensive deposit of loess is found in
north-west China in the loess plateau of the Huang
He (Hwang Ho) basin. It is estimated to cover an
area of 650 000 sq km (250,000 square miles), and
the deposits have accumulated to a thickness of 60
to 150 metres (200 to 500 feeQ! In China, such yel-
lowish wind-borne dust from the Gobi Desert is
called 'Huangtu' - the yellow earth. But the original
term loess actually comes from a village in Alsace,
France, bearing that name, where such deposits
occurred. Similar deposits also occur in some parts
of Germany, France and Belgium, and are locally
called limon. They are also wind-borne but were
blown from material deposited at the edge of ice-
sheets during the Ice Ages. In parts of the Mid-
West, U.S.A. loess was derived from the ice-sheets
which covered northern North America and is
termed adobe.
Landforms due to Water Action in
Deserts
Few deserts in the world are entirely without rain or
water. The annual precipitation may be small, 127
to 254 mm (5 to 10 inches), and comes in irregular
showers. But thunderstorms do occur and the rain
falls in torrential downpours, producing devastating
effects. A single rainstorm may bring several centi-
metres of rain within a few hours, drowning people
who camp in dry desert streams and flooding mud-
baked houses in the oases. As deserts have little veg-
etation to protect the surface soil, Iarge quantities of
rock wastes are transported in the sudden raging tor-
rents, or flash-floods. Loose gravels, sand and fine
dust are swept down the hill sides. They cut deep
gullies and ravines forming bqdland topography.
Subsequent downpours widen and deepen the gullies
when they wash down more soft rocks from the sur-
face. There is so much material in the flash floods
that the flow becomes liquid mud. When the masses
of debris are deposited at the foot of the hill or the
mouth of the valley, an alluvial cone or fan or 'dry
delta' is formed, over which the temporary stream
discharges through several channels, depositing
more material. The pasty alluvial deposits are sub-
jected to rapid evaporation by the hot sun and down-
ward percolation of water into the porous ground,
and soon dry up leaving mounds of debris.
Apart from gullies there are many larger dry chan-
nels or valleys. These are deepened by vertical cor-
rasion by raging torrents during the occasional
cloudbursts. These are the wadis and are dry for
most of the time. Some desert streams are fed by the
melting snow of the distant mountains outside the
deserts and rivers flow as exotic streams. The water
carves out steep walls, which rise abruptly from the
stream bed. In Algeria such gorges are termed
chebka.
In arid and semi-arid areas the outflowing streams
from the upland regions are both short and inter-

mittent. They drain into the lower depressions so
that drainage is almost entirely internal. Sometimes
water collected in a depression or a desert basin does
not completely disappear by evaporation or seepage,
and a temporary lake is formed. Such lakes contain
a high percentage of salts, because of high evapo-
ration, and are glistening white when they dry up.
The lakes and the alluvial plains formed by them are
called playas, salinas or salars in the United States
and Mexiqo, and shotts in northern Africa (Fig. 7.8).
The floor of the depression is made up of two fea-
tures, the bajada and the pediment. The bajada is
a depositional feature made up of alluvial material
laid down by the intermittent streams. The pediment
is an erosional plain formed at the base of the
surrounding mountain scarps.
Ouestions and Exercises
1. Draw annotated diagrams and explain very
briefly any three of the following desert fea-
tures:
(a) yardangs;
(b) barchans;
(c) pediments;
(d) inselbergs;
(e) wadis.
2. Attempt a simple classification of deserts.
Justify your basis of classification by bringing
out their distinct differences in appearance,
formation and outstanding features.
3. With the aid of diagrams, explain the major
differences between any three of the following
pairs of desert landforms:
(a) zeugen and yardangs;
(b) mesas and inselbergs;
(c) crescentic barchans and longitudinal seifs;
(d) bajadas and pediments;
(e) millet seed and dreikanter.
4. Explain concisely the processes of deflation,
abrasion and deposition by winds. With the aid
of diagrams explain two topographical features
formed by any two of the above processes.
5. The following terms are closely related to
desert landforms. For any four of them, define
with reference to examples what the terms
mean:
(a) erg landscape;
(b) loess deposits;
(c) badland topography;
(d) rock pedestais;
Great Dust Bowl:
flash-floods.
State the different types of dunes caused
by wind action in deserts.
What are the principal factors that have
contributed to such differences, especially
in their size and appearance?
What has given rise to the crescent shape
of the barchan (barkhan) type of dune?
In what kinds of environment is wind
action most dominant?
How do the clear, blue skies of desert
lands affect the surface rocks?
How does the absence of vegetation in
deserts affect the resultant landform?
Explain how insolation affects weathering
in hot deserts.
Suggest ways by which weathering is
caused as a result of condensation occur-
ring in deserts at night.
Describe how occasional thunderstorms
produce devastating effects on desert
landforms.
9. Wind is the most dominant agent in the sculp-
ture of desert landforms.
With reference to the above statement:
(a) Describe the abrasive work of winds;
(b) Explain how rock particles are transported
by wind;
(c) Name Ttve outstanding features in deserts
caused by wind action.
10. Name three features produced by wind erosion
(e)
(f)
6. (a)
(c)
7. (a)
(b)
(c)
(b)
8. (a)
(b)
(c)
Fig. 7.8 Intermont desert basin

and another two features by wind deposition
which are frequently seen in tropical deserts.
For one of each type:
(a) draw a diagram to show the main charac-
teristic features;
(b) describe its physical appearance;
(c) explain how it is formed;
(d) name one area where an example can be
found.
11. (a) Why are badlands often found in semi-arid
regions of the world?
(b) What agents of erosion are normally
responsible for badland formation?
Sample Objective Ouestions
1. The most typical feature of a canyon
is its
A U-shaPed valleY
B irregular slope surfaces
C muddy river banks
D large volume of water
2. Loess is wind-blown dust that is de-
posited outside the desert limits. It is
also known by other names but nol
by the name
A serir
B limon
C adobe
D huangtu
(c) Name an area in the northern hemisphere
where extensive badlands can be seen.
12. 'Though wind is the most potent agent in arid
erosion, the role of water cannot be dis-
counted.' With reference to the above state-
ment:
(a) Describe the work of water in desert lands.
(b) What prominent features are produced by
water action in deserts?
(c) Define 'flash floods' and say why such
floods are dangerous.
4. The most outstanding characteristic
of arid deserts is
A its high relative humidity
B its small diurnal range of temper-
ature
C its vast expanse of barren sand
D the presence of waves of reces-
sional moraines
5. The shape and size of sand dunes
are influenced by the following ex-
cept
A the size of the sand particles
B the velocity of the wind
C the relief of the ground
D the subterranean drainage pat-
tem
The 'ridge and furrow' landscape of
the hot deserts refers to that formed
by
A inselbergs
B mesas
C zeugens
D barchans

