Chapter 11 lslands and Coral Reefs
An island is a piece of land surrounded on all sides
by water. It may occur individually or in a group, in
open oceans or seas. Smaller ones of only local sig-
nificance are found even in lakes and rivers. Gen-
erally speaking, all islands may be grouped under the
following types:
Gontinental islands
These islands were formerly part of the mainland
and are now detached from the continent. They may
be separated by a shallow lagoon or a deep channel
(Fig. 11.1). Their separation could be due to subsid-
ence of some part of the land or to a rise in sea-level,
so that the lowland links are submerged by the sea.
Their former connection with the neighbouring
mainland can be traced from the similar physical
structure, flora and fauna that exist on both sides of
the channel. In the course of time, modification by
men and other natural forces may give rise to dif-
ferent surface features. But even then, the basic
structural features will remain the same. Continental
islands may appear as:
1. Individual islands. These lie just outside the
continent, very much associated with the character-
istic features of the mainland of which they were
once part. Some of the outstanding examples are
Newfoundland, separated from the mainland by the
Fig. 1 1 .1 Continental island
Strait of Belle Isle; Malagasy, by the Mozambique
Channel; Sri Lanka by the Palk Strait; Tasmania by
the Bass Strait and Taiwan by the Formosa Strait.
2. Archipelagos or island groups. These com-
prise groups of islands of varying sizes and shapes,
e.g. the British Isles, the Balearic. Islands of the
Mediterranean and also those of the Aegean Sea.
3. Festoons or islgnd arcs. The islands form an
archipelago in the shape of a loop around the edge
of the mainland, marking the continuation of moun-
tain ranges which can be traced on the continent,
e.g. the East Indies, the Aleutian Islands, Ryukyu
Islands, Kurile Islands and other island arcs of the
Pacific coasts.
Oceanic islands
These islands are normally small and are located in
the midst of oceans. They have no connection with
the mainland which may be hundreds of thousands
of kilometres away. They have a flora and fauna
unrelated to those of the continents (Fig. 11.2). The
Galapagos Islands have many unique species of
animals. Due to their remoteness from the major
trading centres of the world, most of the oceanic
islands are very sparsely populated. Some of them
provide useful stops for aeroplanes and ocean steam-
ers that ply between continents across vast stretches
Fig. 11.2 Oceanic island (including a volcanic island)
Oceanic 
.ts- j

the Canary Islands. Those of the Indian Ocean are
Mauritius and Reunion. In the Antarctic Ocean are
the South Sandwich Islands, Bouvet Island and
many others (Plate 11.A).
2. Coral islands. Unlike the volcanic islands, the
coral islands are very much lower and emerge just
above the water surface. These islands, built up by
coral animals of various species, are found both near
the shores of the mainland and in the midst of
oceans. Coral islands include the Marshall Islands,
Gilbert and Ellice Islands of the Pacific; Bermuda
in the Atlantic and the Laccadives and Maldives of
the Indian Ocean.
Coral Reefs
In tropical seas, many kinds of coral animals and
marine organisms such as coral polyps, calcareous
algae, shell-forming creatures and lime-secreting
plants live in large colonies. Though they are very
tiny creatures, their ability to secrete calcium car-
bonate within their tiny cells has given rise to a
peculiar type of marine landform. They exist in
numerous species of many forms, colours and
shapes. Under favourable conditions, they grow in
great profusion just below the water-level. Taking
coral animals as a whole, the polyps are the most
abundant and also the most important. Each polyp
resides in a tiny cup of coral and helps to form coral
reefs. When they die, their limy skeletons are
cemented into coralline limestone. There are also
11.8 A coral coast of the Tonga lslands with its lush veg-
etation
11.A Rarotonga in the Cook lslands, a rugged volcanic is-
land in the Pacitic N.Z. High Commission Malaysia
of water. Generally speaking, oceanic islands fall
into one of the following groups:
l. Volcanic islands. Many of the islands in the
oceans are in fact the topmost parts of the cones of
volcanoes that rise from the ocean bed. Most of
them are extinct. but there are also some active
ones. The best known volcanic peak of the Pacific
Ocean is Mauna Loa in Hawaii, which is 4 169
metres (13,680 feet) above sea-level. Tracing down-
wards, Mauna Loa is found to have been built up
from the ocean floor at a depth 5 490 metres (18,000
feet) below the water surface! Other volcanic islands
have emerged from the submarine ridges of the
oceans.
The volcanic islands are scattered in most of the
earth's oceans. In the Pacific Ocean, they occur in
several groups such as Hawaii, the Galapagos
Islands and the South Sea islands. In the Atlantic
are the Azores, Ascension, St. Helena, Madeira and

non-reef-building species such as the 'precious cor-
als' of the Pacific Ocean and the 'red coral' of the
Mediterranean which may survive in the colder and
even the deeper waters. As a rule, they thrive well
only in the warmer tropical seas.
The reef-building corals survive best under the fol-
lowing conditions:
l. The water temperature must not fall below 20 "C
(68'F). Thisvirtually limits the areal distribution of
corals to the tropical and sub-tropical zones. Again
they will not flourish where there are cold currents
because of the up-welling of the cold water from the
depths that cools the warm surface water. This
explains why coral reefs are generally absent on the
western coasts of continents. On the other hand the
warming effect of the warm currents, e.g. the Gulf
Stream, means that corals are found far to the north
of the West Indies in the Atlantic Ocean. The Pacific
and the Indian Oceans, however, have the most
numerous coral reefs.
2. The depth ofthe water should not exceed 30 fath-
oms or 55 metres (180 feet) because beyond this
depth, sunlight is too faint for photosynthesis to take
place. This is essential for the survival of the micro-
scopic algae, on which the coral polyps depend.
Shallow water of less than 30 metres (100 feet) is.
ideal. But there should always be plenty of water as
polyps cannot survive for too long out of water.
3. The water should be saline and free from sedi-
ment. Corals therefore survive best in the movins
ocean water well away from the silty 6oasts oi
muddy mouths of streams. The corals are best devel-
oped on the seaward side of the reef, where con-
stantly moving waves, tides and currents maintain an
abundant supply of clear, oxygenated water. They
also bring an adequate supply of food in the form of
microscopic organism.
Types of Goral Reef
There are three main types of coral reef:
l. Fringing reefs. A fringing reef is a coralline plat-
form lying close to the shore extending outwards
from the mainland (Plate 11.C). It is sometimes sep-
arated from the shore by a shallow lagoon. It is
widest when fringing a protruding headland but
completely absent when facing the mouth of a
stream. The outer edge grows rapidly because of the
splashing waves that continuously renew the supply
of fresh food. The reefs may be about a kilometre
wide, lying just above the level of low water and
11.C A fringing reef on the Hong Kong coast
Fig. 11.3(al Section of a fringing reef
\\\\\\\\\\.\*- - - -.^'/ -
\\\i\\i$N\\\\\N*
iiiiiii\\isiiii\\\i\ii\\i\\\\\\\N
(b) Plan of a fringing reef

(bl Plan of a barrier reef
Fig. 11.4 Barrier reef
sloping steeply downwards on the seaward side to a
depth of about 30 metres (100 feet) (Fig. 11.3).
2. Barrier reefs. A barrier reef is separated from
the coast by a much wider and deeper channel or
lagoon (Fig. 11.a). The reef is partially submerged.
11.D. Atafu atoll in the Tokelau island group N.Z. High
Commission Malaysia
Where it lies above the water-level and sand can
accumulate on it, a little vegetation is possible. The
barrier reefs have narrow gaps at several places to
allow the water from the enclosed lagoon to return
to the open ocean. Such gaps are very useful for
shipping and provide the only entrances for ships to
enter or leave the lagoon. The best known barrier
reef is the Great Barrier Reef off the coast of
Queensland, Australia. It is 1 930 km (1,200 miles)
long, separated from the coast by a channel 160 km
(100 miles) wide in places and over 60 metres (200
feet) deep.
3. Atolls. Atolls are similar to barrier reefs except
that they are circular in shape, enclosing a shallow
lagoon without any land in the centre. The encircling
ring is usually broken in a few places to allow the
free flow of water (Plate 11.D and Fig. 11.5). On the
inside of the reefs, sand and limestone debris collect
and palm trees like coconuts may grow. Such palm
trees thrive well in the brackish water of the lagoon.
The nuts fall into the water and are distributed
widely by floating from one coral island to another.
The calm waters are useful for fishing and canoeing.
Some of the large atolls, e.g. Suvadiva in the Mal-
dives, west of Sri Lanka, have a lagoon over 64 km
(40 miles) across. A number of them provide essen-
tial air bases for trans-Pacific aircraft.
bafrior
ln*"
Section of a barrier reef
t--rni2
0 miles 20
q
$,
{u =b"

(a) Section of an atoll
(b) Plan of an atoll
Fig. 11.5 Atoll
The Probable Origin of Goral Reefs
The subject of the origin of coral reefs has been stud-
ied and debated for over one and a half centuries.
Several theories have been suggested but none is
universally accepted.
The most widely accepted theory is that put for-
ward by the great scientist Charles Darwin, after his
voyage to the Pacific islands in 1842. It is known as
the subsidence theory. Darwin assumed that all coral
reefs began as fringing reefs around an island or the
topmost portions of extinct volcanoes that stood
above the ocean bed. Due to a general downwarping
of the earth's crust, the islands gradually subsided.
The corals continued to grow upwards to keep pace
with the subsidence. The growth was more vigorous
at the outward edge than the landward edge because
of the more favourable living conditions for corals,
so the encircling reef widened. It then formed a bar-
rier reef, with a lagoon between the island and the
reef. Eventually, when the land was completely sub-
merged, only the outer rims of the reefs were seen,
reef
i. A fringing reef
reef
ii. Subsidence of the land leads to a barrier reef developing
iii. Further subsidence matched by the growth of coral leads
to an atoll
Fig. 11.6(a) Darwin's theory of subsidence (coral reef
growing upwards and outwards to keep pace with subsid-
ing island, passing from fringing reef, to barrier reef and
eventually atoll)
Fig. 11.6(b) Daly's Glacial Control Theory
i, A fringing reef
former sea-level
ii. lsland is planed when sea is at a lower level
coral
lagoon 
barrier
t/ 
,/
atoll
lag
,/
,F"
d**
gI
coral reel
iii. Sea-level rises and coral grows upwards forming atoll

forming an atoll. The submerged islaqd was covered lower the islands. With the return of the warmer cli-
by a layer of sediment so that the characteristic cir- mate, the water that was locked up in the ice sheets
cular lagoon is generally shallow. Thus atolls mark melted. Consequently, there was a rise in the sea-
thepositionof theformerislands(Fig. 11.6a).More level which in some cases submerged these lower
recent researches by oceanographers have revealed islands. On these wave-planed platforms, corals
that the ocean floor has, in fact, been subjected to 
began to grow upwards at the rate of a third of a
subsidence especially in the Pacific. Darwin's expla- metre in a decade to keep pace with the rising water-
nation was therefore generally correct. 
level (Fig. 11.6b). Coral reefs, where islands still
Amongst the other theories, perhaps the Ameri- project above sea-level, and atolls were thus formed.
can geographer, R.A. _Daly's glacial control theory Recent evidence of boring through coral formations
put forward in 1910 is worth consideration. During seems to favour Daly's explanation of a change in
his visit to Mauna Kea in Hawaii, he noticed the sea-level and consequent erosion of the islands.
close relationship between glaciation and the devel- However the deepest borings reveal basaltic rocks.
opment of coral reefs. He believed that during the These correspond to the subsided islands envisaged
height of the Ice Ages, the water was too cold for by Darwin. Thus a combination of the two theories
any coral growth to take place. With the absence of 
accounts for all the important features of coral reefs
a coral barrier, marine erosion was able to attack and and atolls.
Ouestions and Exercises
1. Give a concise classification of the islands of 
6. (a) Differentiate between continental and
the world. Quote actual examples of islands to 
oceanic islands.
justify your proposed classification. 
(b) Give three examples of each of the above
2. The following are some of the islands of the 
two types of island.
world. State in which part of the globe they are 
(c) Which type is normally larger in size than
found. For any three of. them account for their 
the other?
probable origin: 
7. (a) Describe the world's distribution of coral
Sakhalin Island; 
reefs and atolls.
Andaman Islands; 
(b) What are the main problems posed by their
Maldive Islands; 
origin?
St. Helena; 
8. (a) Define 'archipelagos', 'festoons' and 'bar-
Hawaiian Islands: 
rier reefs'.
Crete. 
(b) Locate in a world map an example of each
3. What are the three general types of coral reef 
of the above.
formed by coral animals. Point out the distinct 
(c) For any two of them, draw well-labelled
differences between them. 
diagrams to illustrate their characteristic
4. Explain clearly how coral reefs are formed. 
features.
Under what conditions do corals thrive best? 9. Explain the following:
5 With the aid of examples and diagrams, explain 
(a) Coral reefs are generally absent in swampy
any three of the following terms connected with 
river deltas.
islands and coral reefs: 
(b) Mauna Loa in Hawaii is actually an emer-
(a) continental islands; 
gent peak of a volcanic island.
(b) archipelagos; 
(c) Much of the flora and fauna of continental
(c) oceanic islands; 
islands is similar to that of the adjoining
(d) coral polyps; 
mainland.
(e) fringing reefs; 
10. (a) Why are coral reefs confined mainly to
(f) atolls. 
tropical and sub-tropical waters?
(b) What other factors affect their general dis-
tribution?
r02

Sample Objective O,uestions
1. Of the following places which is the
most conducive for the formation of
coral reefs?
A Deep, blue seas in the temperate
zone
B Tropical saline seas free from
sediments
C Sub-tropical waters washed by
cold currents
D Enclosed seas with a high salinity
2. Coral animals such as coral polyps,
calcareous algae and other shell-
forming creatures live in colonies
forming coral reefs. They survive
best under these conditions except
A just below sea level
B in tropical warm waters
C where cold currents wash the
shores
D where the water is saltish
3. The basic difference between a
fringing reef and a barrier reef is
that the
A fringing reef is not found within
the tropics
B barrier reef is separated from the
mainland by a wide channel
C fringing reef is much longer than
a barrier reef
D barrier reef is not built by polyps
4. The diagram below shows the cross-
section of an atoll. Its most distinc-
tive feature amongst the corals is
A It is sited on the volcanic peaks in
the oceans
B It is separated from the mainland
by a shallow lagoon
C If is the only type of coral reefs
that survive in temperate waters
D It is circular in shape
5. The greatest difference between a
continental island and an oceanic is-
land is its
A shape
B size
C ability to support vegetation
D distance from the mainland
SEA
LEVEL
r03

