Chapter 10 Coastal Landforms
The Action of Waves, Tides and
Gurrents
The coastline, under the constant action of the
waves, tides and currents, is undergoing changes
from day to day. On calm days, when winds are
slight, waves do little damage to the shoreline and
may instead help to build up beaches and other
depositional features. It is in storms that the ravages
of the waves reach their greatest magnitude. The
average pressure of Atlantic waves on adjacent
coasts is about 2 932 kgper sq m (600 lb. per square
foot) in the summer and treble that in winter, Dur-
ing storms, the pressure exerted is more than
29320 kg per sq m (6,0001b. per square foot)!
Movements of such intensity will wear down not
only the cliffs but also sea walls and buildings. Tides
and currents, on contact with the shores, make very
little direct attack on the coastline. Tides affect
marine erosion mainly by extending a line of. erosion
into a zone of erosion. This zone corresponds to the
area between the low water level and the high water
level. Currents help to move eroded debris and
deposit it as silt, sand and gravel along the coasts.
The Mechanics of Marine Erosion
The most powerful agents of marine erosion are
wayes. Their origin is due to the sweeping of winds
over the water surface, which sets a series of undu-
lating swells surging forward. These become higher
and swifter. A normal wave in an open ocean may
measure 6 metres (20 feet) high (the vertical height
between the crest and the trough) and 120 metres
(400 feet) long (the wave-length or the horizontal
distance between one crest and another). During
storms this is greatly increased, depending on the
speed and duration of the winds. On approaching
shallow water near the shores, their speed is reduced
and the waves are curved or refracted against the
alignment of the coast. Shallow water, when it is less
than the height of the waves, checks their forward
movement. the crests curl over and break into the
shores in a mass of foam as breakers. The water that
finally rushes up the beach and hurls rock debris
against the land is termed swash. The water is
sucked back and retreats as backwash. Another ele-
ment in offshore drift is the undertow, which flows
near the bottom away from the shore. This current
exerts a pulling effect which can be dangerous to
seabathers (Fig. 10.1).
Marine agents of erosion operate in the following
ways to transform the coastal landscape.
1. Corr'asion. Waves armed with rock debris of all
sizes and shapes charge against the base of the cliffs
and wear them back by corrasion. On-coming cur-
rents and tides complete the work by sweeping the
eroded material into the sea.
2. Attrition. The constantly moving waves that
transport beach materials such as boulders, pebbles,
shingle and fine sand also hurl these fragments
against one another, until they are broken down by
attrition into very small pieces. The grinding and
polishing of such fragmental materials against cliff
Fig. 10.1 The mechanics 'of wave motion
wind turbulences
_ _ _._a------i--rrri,{, 
- --rrs 
tr
,\,\
f\4y
iri.,i
wan l6nClh
X = Friction at the base of the wave 
swash+
Y = Wave breaking 
backwash 
-
winddircctioe
wind direction+

faces and against each other is largely responsible
for fine sand which forms the beaches that are so
typical of the seaside resorts.
3. Hydraulic action. In their forward surge, waves
splashing against the coast may enter joints and
crevices in the rocks. The air imprisoned inside is
immediately compressed. When the waves retreat
the compressed air expands with explosive violence.
Such action repeated again and again soon enlarges
the cracks and rock fragments are prised apart.
4. Solvent action. On limestone coasts. the solvent
action of sea water on calcium carbonate sets up
chemical changes in the rocks and disintegration
takes place. This process is limited to limestone
coasts.
The rate of marine erosion depends on the nature
of the rocks, the amount of rock exposed to the s'ea,
the effects of tides and currents, and human inter-
ference in coast protection. Other effects such as
volcanicity, glaciation, earth movement and organic
accumulations have also to be considered.
Goastal Features of Erosion
1. Capes and bays. On exposed coasts, the contin-
ual action of waves on rocks of varying resistance
causes the coastline to be eroded irregularly. This is
particularly pronounced where hard rocks, e.g.
granites and limestones, occur in alternate bands
with softer rocks, e.g. sand and clay. The softer
rocks are worn back into inlets, coves or bays and
the harder ones persist as headlands, promontories
or capes (Fig 10.2). Along the Dorset coast of south-
ern England, Swanage Bay and Durlston Head are
examples. Even where the coast is of one rock type,
irregularities will be caused by variation within the
Fig. 10.2 Coastal features of differential erosion
Fig. 10.3 Cliff beds dipping seawards
Fig. 10.4 Cliff beds dipping landwards
rock. Thus Penang Island, made of granite has many
bays and headlands. Very large indentations such as
the Persian Gulf or the Bay of Bengal are due to
other causes such as submergence or earth move-
ment.
2. Cliffs and wave-cut platforms. Generally any
very steep rock face adjoining the coast forms a
cliff.The rate of recession will depend on its geolog-
ical structure, that is the stratification and jointing
of the rocks and their resistance to wave attack. If
the beds dip seawards, large blocks of rock will be
dislodged and fall into the sea. The cliff will rise in
a series of 'steps' as shown in Fig. 10.3. On the con-
trary if the beds dip landwards as illustrated in
Fig. 10.4, the cliff will be more resistant to wave ero-
sion. Some of the best known cliffs are the chalk
cliffs of the English Channel and include Beachy
Head which is 150 metres (500 feet) high, the Seven
Sisters near the mouth of the Cuckmere and
the'White Cliffs' of Dover.
At the base of the cliff the sea cuts a notch, which
gradually undermines the cliff so that it collapses. As
a cliff recedes landwards under the pounding of
waves, an eroded base is left behind, called a wave-
cut platform (Plate 10.B). The platform, the upper
part of which is exposed at low tide, slopes gently
seawards and its surface is strewn with rock debris
from the receding cliff. Further abrasion continues
until the pebbles are swept away into the sea. The
eroded materials are deposited on the offshore ter-
race (Fig. 10.5). When the platform attains a greater
width, e.g. 48 km (30 miles) in the case of the wave-

HT: High Tide
LT: Low Tide
zone of
wave attack
t,
initial land
su{ace
V
material deposited to
form an off-shore terrace
wave attack
leads to notch
HT ---
LT -----
off-shore terrace
wave-cut platform
Fig. 10.5 The development of shore profile
10.8 A wave-cut platform on the Hong Kong coast S.T. Fok
*."
i:1,'.
10.A A natural arch
cut platform of Strandflat off Western Norway, it is
entirely covered with water and further erosion of
the cliffs is negligible.
3. Cave, arch, stack and stump. (Fig. 10.6 and
Plate 10.A and C). Prolonged wave attack on the
base of a cliff excavates holes in regions of local
weakness called caves, e.g. at Flamborough Head,
England. When two caves approach one another
from either side of a headland and unite, they form
initial la.nd surface

spray forced out of
Fig. 10.6 Arch, stacks and stumps. Where.two caves are
eroded on either side of a headland they may eventually join
to form a natural arch. lf the top of the arch collapses, stacks
are formed. These are gradually worn down until they
become stumps exposed only at low tide.
an arch, e.g. the Needle Eye near Wick, Scotland.
Further erosion by waves will ultimately lead to the
total collapse of the arch. The seaward portion of
the headland will remain as a pillar of rock known
as a stack. One of the finest examples of a stack is
the Old Man of Hoy in the Orkneys which is of Old
Red Sandstone and is 137 metres (450 feet) high.
Equally outstanding are the Needles, Isle of Wight,
which are a group of stacks cut in chalk and dimin-
ishing in size seawards. In the course of time, these
'stubborn' stacks will gradually be removed. The
vertical rock pillars are eroded, leaving behind only
the stumps which are only just visible above the sea-
level, e.g. those of the St. Kilda group, off the Outer
Hebrides, Scotland.
4. Geos and gloups. The occasional splashing of the
waves against the roof of a cave may enlarge the
joints whep compressed air is trapped inside. A nat-
ural shaft is thus formed which may eventually
pierce through to the surface. Waves breaking into
the cave may force water or spray or just air out of
this hole. Such a shaft is termed a gloup (from the
noise made by the water gurgling inside) or blow-
10.C An arch with stack in Sabah known as the tri-foot
stone
sulge Into
Cave they may
cut a shaft to the
Fig. 10.7 Gloup
hole (Fig. 10.7). An example is at Holborn Head in
Caithness, Scotland. The enlargement of blow-holes
and the continued action of waves weakens the cave
roof. When the roof collapses, a long, narrow inlet
or creek develops. Such deep clefts, which may be
30 metres (100 feet) deep and equally long, are
called geos, e.g. the Wife Geo, near Duncansby
Head, Scotland (Fig. 10.8).
Goastal Features of Deposition
1. Beaches. Sands and gravels loosened from the
land are moved by waves to be deposited along the
shore as beaches. This is the most dominant form of
the constructive work of the sea. The eroded mate-
rial is transported along the shore in several distinct
ways. The longshore drift which comes obliquely to
Fig. 10.8 Geo
waves
cliff top through which air or
water are forced
geo
Where a
cave roof
collapses, a
narrow inlet or
geo is formed
9l

waws drNm obliquely lo lhe shore
the coast carries the material along the shore in the
direction of the dominant wind (Fig. 10.9). At the
same time, the backwash removes part of the mate-
rial sedwards-along the bed of the sea,and deposits
it on the off-shore terrace and even beyond. Finer
materials such as silt and mud are deposited in the
shallow waters of a sheltered coast.
The constant action of the waves automatically
sorts out the shoreline deposits in a graded manner.
The coarser materials (cobbles and boulders) are
dropped by the waves at the top of the beach. The
finer materials (pebbles and sand grains) which are
carried down the beach bv the backwash are
10.D Rock pedestals worn off by waves and wind in coastal
Ya Liew near Taipei, Taiwan Goh Cheng Leong
Fis 1o 1o rJ:fi;; 
or a spit
dropped closer to the sea. On smooth lowlands,
beaches may continue for hundreds of kilometres,
like those of the east coast of Peninsular Malaysia,
but in upland regions where the land descends
abruptly into the sea, such as the Chilean coast, long
beaches are absent.
2. Spits and bars. The debris eroded by waves is
continually moved by longshore drift and where
there is an indentation in the coast. such as the
mouth of a river or a bay, material may continue to
be deposited across the inlet. As more materials are
added, they will pile up into a ridge or embankment
of shingle forming a tongue or spit, with one end
attached to the land and the other end projecting
into the sea (Fig. 10.10), e.g. Calshot Spit, South-
ampton Water, England or those along the coast
of Kelantan. Oblique waves may curve the spit into
a hook or recurved spit. When the ridge of shingle
is formed across the mouth of a river or the entrance
to a bay, it is called a bar. The most remarkable
example of a bar is Chesil Beach in Dorset, England,
which extends for over 26 km (16 miles) along the
coast, linking the Isle of Portland with the mainland,
and enclosing a lagoon called the Fleet. Such a con-
necting bar that joins two land masses is better
known as tombolo. On the Baltic coast of Poland and
Germany, large bodies of water are almost com-
pletely enclosed by long bars, locally termed neh-
rungs, to form marshy lagoons or haffs.
3. Marine dunes and dune belts. With the force of
onshore winds, a large amount of coastal sand is dri-
ven landwards forming extensive marine dunes that
stretch into dune belti. Their advance inland may
engulf farms, roads and even entire villages. The
dunes of the Landes, south-west France, cover
15 600 sq km (6,000 square miles); the crests of the
dunes are over 40 metres (130 feet) high. Dunes arg
common in the coastlands of Belgium, Denmark and

the Netherlands. To arrest the migration of the
dunes, sand-binding species of grass and shrubs,
such as marram grass, and pines are planted.
Types of Coast
Despite a great variety of coastal features, coastlines
may be divided into two basic types.
1. Coastlines of submergence. These are due to the
sinking of the land or the rise of the sea, including
such coasts as ria coasts. fiord coasts. estuarine
coasts and Dalmatian or longitudinal coasts.
2. Coastlines of emergence. These are due to the
uplift of the land or a fall in the sea-level. They are
less common and are represented by the uplifted
lowland coast and the emergent upland coast.
COASTLINES OF SUBMERGENCE
1. Ria coasts. During the Ice Age a great deal of
water was locked up in ice. The warmer climate that
followed melted much of the ice. Subsequently there
was an increase in the waters of the oceans and the
sea-level rose appreciably. In some cases it is esti-
mated that there was a rise of almost 90 metres (300
feet) ! In upland coastal regions where the mountains
run at right angles to the sea, that is transverse or
discordant to the coast (Fig. 10.11), a rise in the sea-
level submerges or drowns the lower parts of the val-
leys to form long, narrow branching inlets separated
by narrow headlands. They differ from fiords in two
important respects, i.e. they are not glaciated and
their depth increases seawards. A ria coast is typical
of the Atlantic type of coast like those of north-west
France, north-west Spain, south-west Ireland,
Devon and Cornwall. As rias are generally backed
by highland, they support a few large commercial
ports though they have deep water and offer shel-
tered anchorage. They have been extensively used
for siting fishing ports and naval bases such as
Plymouth and Brest.
2. Fiord coasts. Fiords are submerged U-shaped gla-
cial troughs. They mark the paths of glaciers that
plunged down from the highlands. They have steep
walls, often rising straight from the sea, with tribu-
tary branches joining the main inlet at right angles.
Due to the greater intensity of ice erosion, fiords are
deep for great distances inland but there is a shallow
section at the seaward end formed by a ridge of rock
and called the threshold (Fig. 10.12). Off the fiord
coast are ntrmerous islands or skerries which, with
the shallow thresholds, sometimes only 60 metres
(200 feet) deep, complicate coastal navigation. Fiord
coasts are almost entirely confined to the higher lat-
itudes of the temperate regions which were once gla-
ciated, e.g. Norway, (Plate 10.E) Alaska, British
Columbia, southern Chile and the South Island of
New Zealand. Some of the large fiords are extremely
long and deep. For example, the Sogne Fiord of
Norway is 177 km (110 miles) long 6 km (4 miles)
wide and almost | 220 metres (4,000 feet) deep in
Fig. 10.12 A fiord coast (submergent and glaciated)
Fig. 10.11 A ria coast (discordant, Atlantic type)
iids:) ), ) / t z z2 2 ) 2)D ), ;;
valleys have,,i,i:l
been drowned
sectaon of a ria

10.E A fiord coast in Norway Servizio Editoriale Fotografico
its mid-channel. Despite their deep and sheltered
water, few large ports are located in fiords. Their
mountainous background with poor accessibility
inland, attract few settlements. Agriculture is con-
fined to the deltaic fans, built up where streams flow
down to the fiords. The few towns that exist either
as fishing or market centres, e.g. Trondheim, are
only of local importance.
3. Dalmatian coast. This is the longitudinal coast
where mountains run parallel or concordant to the
Fig. 10.13 A Dalmatian coast (concordant, Pacific type)
coast. The name is taken from the coast of Dalmatia,
Yugoslavia, along the Adriatic Sea, where the sub-
mergence of the coastline produces long, narrow
inlets with a chain of islands parallel to the coast.
The elongated islands are the crests of former ranges
and the narrow sounds were the former longitudinal
valleys (Fig. 10.13). The Dalmatian type of coast is
also typical of the Pacific coast where the ranges are
parallel to the coast, e.g. western coasts of North
and South America but there the coastline is more
regular. Like the ria and fiord coasts, the mountain-
ous nature of the Dalmatian coastline hinders com-
munication inland. It has deep, sheltered harbours
but no distinguished ports. On the Pacific coast,
however, there are some important ports such as San
Francisco.
4. Estuarine coasts. In submerged lowlands, the
mouths of rivers are drowned so that funnel-shaped
estuaries are formed. If their entrances are not silted
by moving sandbanks, they make excellent sites for
ports, e.g. the estuaries of the Thames, Elbe and
Plate are the sites of such great seaports as London,
Hamburg and Buenos Aires. Tidal effects further
enhance the value of the ports and even when there
is a little silting, modern dredges help to keep the
ports open all the time.
COASTLINES OF EMERGENCE
1. Uplifted lowland coast. The uplift of part of the
continental shelf produces a smooth, gently sloping
coastal lowland (Fig. 10.1a). The offshore waters
are shallow with lagoons, salt-marshes and mud-
flats. Where the emergent deposits from the conti-
nental shelves are sandy and gravelly, beaches and
marine dunes are formed. Ports that were once
located on the former coast become inland towns.
Examples of uplifted lowland coasts include the
south-eastern U.S.A.. western Finland. eastern
Sweden and parts of coastal Argentina south of the
Rio de la Plata.
Fig. 10.14 Lowland coastline of emergence
old coastlrne
rarsed beach
rarsed sectron
of continental
shell .formrng
{,i}g".
'lr n
coastal plaln

2. Emergent upland coast. Faulting and earth
movement may thrust up.coastal plateaux so that the
whole region is raised, with consequent emergent
features. A raised beach is the most prominent. The
raised beach is beyond the reach of the waves,
though it may still possess arches, stacks and other
coastal features. The emergent upland coast is quite
straight with steep cliffs and deeper offshore water,
for the waves have not yet eroded lines of weakness
or carved a wave-cut platform (Fig. 10.15), It has
little potential for good port sites. Examples of
emergent upland coasts are found in Scotland, the
western coast of the Deccan, India and the western
Arabian coast facing the Red Sea.
Ouestions and Exercises
1. By reference to specific examples, describe
some of the major coastal features resulting
from the constructive and destructive work of
the sea.
2. With the aid of annotated diagrams, describe
the appearance and formation of any three of
the following pairs of features of coastal land-
forms:
(a) cliff and wave-cut platform;
(b) geo and blow-hole;
(c) arch and stack;
(d) spits and bars.
3. How can shorelines be classified? Describe
any one method of classification and explain
briefly some of the major shoreline features
that you have classified.
4. With the help of diagrams, explain the distinct
differences between the following coastlines of
submergence:
(a) ria coast;
(b) fiord coast;
(c) Dalmatian coast;
(d) estuarine coast.
5. Choose any three of the following terms con-
nected with marine landscape. Explain the
meaning of each and state its role in transform-
ing the coastline:
(a) longshore drift;
(b) undertow;
(c) concordant coast;
(d) raised beach;
(e) tombolo.
Fig. 10.15 Upland emergent coastline
Briefly explain the role of the following in the
mechanism of marine erosion:
(a) swash;
(b) undertow;
(c) longshore drift;
(d) breakers.
For any two of them draw annotated diagrams
to explain their development and the role they
play in modifying the coastline.
Explain, with the aid of relevant labelled dia-
grams, why:
(a) Bays have beaches while capes have cliffs;
(b) Along the coast of Chile, long beaches are
comparatively absent;
(c) Most of the world's large seaports are sited
on estuarine coasts.
8. (a) 'Storms do great damage to the coasts',
why is this so?
(b) What measures are taken by local author-
ities to protect the coasts?
9. Choose three of the following: fiord, haff,
delta, stumps, lagoons, sand-spits, atolls. For
each of them:
(a) draw a diagram to show its characteristic
features;
(b) describe its appearance;
(c) explain its formation;
(d) locate an area where an example could be
found.
10. (a) Why do coastlines differ in different parts
of the world?
(b) What major factors affect the rate of
marine erosion?
(c) Name three f.eatures of marine deposition.
6,

Sample Objective Ouestions
1. The Yugoslavian coast is a typical 
D consistentunderwatercurrentac- A thestructureof therocks
example of 
tion on a wave-cut platform 
B the gradient of the coast
A an estuarine coast 
C the action of the tides and cur-
B adalmationcoast 
3. Each ol these pairs of features are 
rents
C afiordedcoast 
the result of inter-related progres- 
D thetiltoftheeanh
D a ria coast 
sive physical processes. pick out
the incorect pat. 
5. The progresive action of the coastal
2. Photograph 10.C on page 91 shows 
A arch and stack 
cliff into caves, arches, stacks and
the tri-foot stone of Sabah. It was 
B doline and uvala 
stumps is basically the work of
formed by 
C mesa and butte 
A spring tides
A the solvent action of tropical rain 
D fold and fault 
B ocean waves
on a limestone coast 
C warm currents
B wind abrasion during the stormy 
4. The shape of the coastline is chang- 
D coral animals
monsoons 
ing continuously, Its rate of change
C prolonged wave attack on the 
dependsonthefollowingexcept
base of a cliff

