Chapter 20 The Temperate Continental
(Steppe) Climate
Distribution
Bordering the deserts, away from the Mediterranean
regions and in the interiors of continents are the tem-
perate grasslands. Though they lie in the Westerly
wind belt, they are so remote from maritime influ-
ence that the grasslands are practically treeless.
These grasslands are so distinctive in their natural
vegetation that, although those which occur in the
southern hemisphere have a much more moderate
climate, they are often dealt with together. In the
northern hemisphere, the grasslands are far more
extensive and are entirely continental. In Eurasia,
they are called the Steppes, and stretch eastwards
from the shores of the Black Sea across the great
Russian plain to the foothills of the Altai Mountains,
a distance of well over 3 200 km (2,000 miles). They
are broken in a few places, being interrupted by the
highlands. There are isolated sections in the Pustaz
Fig. 20.1 The Temperate Grasslands of the world
of Hungary and the plains of Manchuria. In North
America, the grasslands are also quite extensive
and are called the Prairies. They lie between the
foothills of the Rockies and the Great Lakes astride
the American-Canadian border (Fig. 20.1).
In the southern hemisphere, due to the narrow-
ness of the temperate portions of the southern con-
tinents, the grasslands are rather restricted and less
continental. In the case of the Pampas of Argentina
and Uruguay, the grasslands extend right to the sea
and enjoy much maritime influence. In South
Africa, the grasslands are sandwiched between the
Drakensberg and the Kalahari Desert; and are fur-
ther subdivided into the more tropical Bush-veld in
the north, and the more temperate High-veld in the
south. The word'veld' is a Dutch word given by the
early pioneer Dutch farmers who came to settle
here. It means 'field' and is pronounced as 'felt'. [n
Australia, the grasslands are better known as Downs
w
prrt", tri.il, 
Grasstand
Temperate Grasslands
Warm ocean curents
scate : 1 : 215 ooo ooo 
Grassland

JFMAMJJASOND
21t70
16/60
1 0/50
4/40
-1l30
-7 t20
-'t2t10
-18/0
-22t-',to
27180
21 170
16/60
10/50
.=o
_E
;9
g.:.E>
E8
i:E
;
l|!Fo-
6()
cLO
Eo
10214
0/o
.g
:Y\oo
Eo
15216
12715
10214
0/o JFMAMJJAS
months
JFMAMJJAS
22 22 20 17 14 .t2 11 t4 17
72 71 68 62 57 53 52 57 63
r40, r02 89 25 13 o 6 o 
5.5 4.0 35 1.0 0.5 o 0 0 
l.o
o
months
Winnipeg:JFMAMJJAS
Temp."c: 
-20 -18 -9 3 
1t 17 l9 t8 
"F.: 
-4 o 
t5 38 52 62 66 64 54
Precip. {mml: 23 l8 
30 36 51 79 79 56 56
{inches): 0.9 O-7 12 1.4 2.O 3.1 3.1 2.2 2.2
N D 
range/total
-6 -14 39'C
21 6 
70"F.
28 23 508 mm
II 09 20inches
Fig.2o.2lal
Steppe Climate in the northen hemisphere
Place: Winnipeg, Canadian Priaries ( 1 5'N, 97.W)
Altitude: 232 metres (760 feetl
Annual precipitation: 508 mm (20 inches)
Annual temperature range: 39 "C (19" -(-201"Cy70"F. (66.-
4"F.)
and are found in the Murray-Darling basin of south-
ern Australia. In New Zealand, the grasslands are
found in the Canterbury Plains.
Glimate
Temperature. Their location in the heart of conti-
nents means that they have little maritime influence.
Their climate is thus continental with extremes of
temperature. Summers are very warm, over 19 oC
(66 "F) in Winnipeg for July, as illustrated in
Fig.20.2(a) and22"C (72 'F) for January for Pre-
toria as shown in Fig. 20.2(b). Winters are very cold
in the continental steppes of Eurasia because of the
enormous distances from the nearest sea. The winter
months are well below freezing point and in Win-
nipeg the January reading is -20 "C (-4 "F), 20.C
(36'F.) below freezing-point.
In contrast, the steppe type of climate in the
southern hemisphere is never severe. The winters are
so mild that the mean temperature for any of the
winter months is usually between 2 "C (35 "F) and
13'C (55 'F). Temperatures below freezing-point
even in mid-winter (July in the southern hemi-
sphere) are exceptional. Pretoria, the station chosen
to illustrate the steppe type of climate in the south-
ern hemisphere has 11 'C (51 "F) in mid-winter
O N D 
range/rotal
20 21 22 1t"c
68 69 71 2o"F.
51 102 102 660mm
20 4.0 40 26inches
Fig. 20.2(b)
Steppe Climate in the southern hemisphere
Place: Pretoria, Transvaal, Republic of South Africa (25. 2g" E)
Altitude: 1 326 m (4,350 feet)
Annual precipitation: 660 mm (26 inches)
Annual temperature range: 11'C .22' - 11"Cy20"F.
(72" - 52"F.1
(July), the coldest month of the year. Statistics from
other parts of the southern continents also show a
mild winter. For example, the July mean (mid-win-
ter) for Johannesburg is 9 'C (49 oF), for Buenos
Aires, 9 "C (49'F), and for Mildura (Murray-Darling
basin) also 9 'C (49'F). These statistics establish
the moderating effects of oceans on the climates of
the southern hemisphere.
The annual range of temperature is great, a direct
result of continentality. Winters are so cold that
parts of the Eurasian Steppes are snow-covered for
several months. The snow melts with the return of
spring and by mid-summer, temperatures soar to
over 1.8 "C (65 'F). It is really hot for its latitude. For
example, the mid-summer temperature for Kiev is
19 "C (67 "F). The stations in the southern hemi-
sphere record even higher temperatures, e.g. 20 "C
(69 "F) in Johannesburg, 23"C (74 'F) in Buenos
Aires and 25'C (77 'F) in Mildura.
It is clear from the two selected stations given that
there is a tremendous difference between the annual
temperature range of the northern and southern
hemisphere, again a factor of continentality. The
range in Winnipeg, in Fig. 20.2(a), is 39'C (70 "F),
nearly three times as great as that of Pretot'ia, in
Fig. 20.2(b), at 11 oC (20 "F). Readings taken in var-
ious other stations of the northern and southern
o
1.4
Pretoria:
Temp. "C:
1.,
Precip. (mml:
(inches)

hemispheres confirm this trend. The annual range
for Shenyang (Mukden) in Manchuria is 38 "C
(69 "F). In comparison, the annual range of the
more maritime stations of Johannesburg, Buenos
Aires and Mildura in the southern hemisphere are
very much smaller, 11 "C (20'F) 14 "C (25 'F),
76 "C (28'F) respectively.
Precipitation. In its continental position, the annual
precipitation of the Steppe Climate can be expected
to be light. The average rainfall may be taken as
about 508 mm (20 inches), but this again varies
according to location from 254 mm (10 inches) to
762mm (30 inches). Winnipeg, in Fig.20.2(a), has
508 mm (20 inches) with a distinct summer maxi-
mum from convectional sources, when the continen-
tal interiors are intensely heated. The heaviest rain
comes in the middle of the year with 79 mm (3.1
inches) each in June and July. Most of the winter
months have about 25 mm (an inch) of precipitation,
brought by the occasional depressions of the Wes-
terlies and coming in the form of snow. In many
other continental stations, the annual precipitation
is even less, though the general pattern remains the
same with most of the rain falling in the summer.
The maritime influence in the steppe type of cli-
mate of the southern hemisphere is even better
brought out by the rainfall regime. Its annual pre-
cipitation is always more than the average 508 mm
(20 inches) because of the warm ocean currents that
wash the shores of the steppe-lands here. Pretoria,
in Fig. 20.2(b), has an annual precipitation of
660 mm (26 inches) with the wettest months in
November, December, January and February, the
summer season of the southern hemisphere. There
are three months (June, July and August) without
any rain. This is the period of drought that may have
such a disastrous effect on the sheep rearing industry
here. The dry season is particularly pronounced in
temperate grasslands adjoining deserts, for example
in Australia. Mildura, on the fringe of the mallee
scrub of the Great Australian Desert, and also in the
rain-shadow area of the Great Dividing Range, has
an annual rainfall of only 269 mm (10.6 inches).
Irrigation is essential. The other southern hemi-
sphere stations have moderate rainfall, e.9.762 mm
(30 inches) in Johannesburg and 965 mm (38 inches)
in Buenos Aires.
On the eastern slopes of the Rockies in Canada
and the U.S.A. a local wind, similar to the Fohn in
Switzerland, called the Chinook, comes in a south-
westerly direction to the Prairies and has a consid-
erable effect on the local pastures. It actually comes
with the depressions in winter or early spring from
the Pacific coast ascending the Rockies and then
descending to the Prairies. It is a hot wind and may
raise the temperature by 22 "C (40 "F) within a mat-
ter of 20 minutes. It melts the snow-covered pastures
and animals can be driven out of doors to graze in
the open fields. The agricultural year is thus accel-
erated. Local farmers welcome the Chinook for
frequent Chinooks mean mild winrtters and early
spring.
Natural Vegetation
Though the term 'steppe vegetation' geographically
refers to the scanty vegetation of the sub-arid lands
of continental Eurasia, many authors, including the
late Professor Sir Dudley Stamp, have extended the
term to include the temperate grassland all over the
world. In this connection, our reference to steppe
grassland is taken to mean the temperate grasslands
of the mid-latitudes: the Steppes, Prairies, Pampas,
Veld and Downs.
It is natural to expect the steppes to be grass-cov-
ered, differing only in the density and quality of the
grass. Their greatest difference from the tropical
savanna is that they are practically treeless and the
grasses are much shorter. Where the rainfall is mod-
erate, above 508 mm (20 inches), the grasses are
tall, fresh and nutritious and are better described as
long prairie grass. This is typical of the grass of the
wheat-lands in North America, the rich black earth
or chernozem areas of Russian Ukraine and the bet-
ter watered areas of the Asiatic Steppes. Where the
rainfall is light, less than 508 mm (20 inches) or
unreliable, or the soil is poor, as in the continental
interiors of Asia the short steppe type of grass pre-
vails. The grasses are not only shorter but also wiry
and sparse, often found in discontinuous clumps,
with bare soil exposed between them. These areas
are less suitable for arable farming and are used for
some form of ranching as in the High Plains of the
U.S.A.
The climatic requirements of grass are quite dif-
ferent from those of trees. They require less mois-
ture than trees and an annual precipitation of.254to
508 mm (10 to 20 inches) is adequate. Their growth
is not abruptly checked by summer droughts or win-
ter cold. The steppe grass can lie dormant through-
out the prolonged drought. They sprout and come
to life as soon as the temperature is about 6 oC
(43'F) warm enough for plant growth and grow
steadilv with verv little moisture.
l9l

The appearance of. the temperate grasslands varies
with seasons. In spring, the grass begins to appear,
green, fresh and blooming with small, colourful
flowers. The light rainfall that comes in late spring
and early summer greatly stimulates their growth
and there is plenty for the animals to graze. The
herdsmen are busiest at this time. In summer, there
is so much heat and evaporation that the grass is
scorched. The carpet of bluish-green grass turns yel-
low and soon brown. Towards autumn, the grass
withers and dies, but the roots remain alive and lie
dormant throughout the cold winter. The winter is
harsh and long, but the snow is never of great
depth. Everything is quiet but with the next spring,
the cycle is repeated and the steppe is alive again.
Trees are very scarce in the steppes, because of the
scanty rainfall, long droughts and severe winters.
The rolling plain is an endless stretch of grass,
whether green or brown, except along the water
courses where a few low willows, poplars or alders
break the monotony. Polewards, an increase in pre-
cipitation gives rise to a transitional zone of wooded
steppes where some conifers gradually appear. Even
then, the trees are very scattered and few in number.
Towards the equator, the steppe grass becomes
shorter and sparser, till it merges into the desert with
thorny scrub.
In the cultivated regions, such as the wheat farms
of the Prairies, double rows of trees are planted
around the house to shield the occupants from the
strong winds which come unobstructed across kilo-
metres of level ground. This provides the greatest
contrast in a land which is essentially grass. There
are no hedges and few fences and the rows of
planted trees form an unusual landmark from the
air!
Economic Development
The temperate grasslands were once the home of
grazing animals; wild horses in the Asiatic Steppes,
swift-footed bison in the Prairies and untamed buf-
faloes in the Pampas. Even as recently as the last
century, these grasslands were dominated by
nomadic and semi-nomadic peoples like the Kirghiz
of the Asiatic Steppes. They roamed far and wide
with their herds and earned a precarious living from
whatever pastures they could find. The Red Indians
of North America were mostly hunters who moved
around after the bison and other animals. Cultiva-
tion was unknown and the region was one of the
most sparsely populated parts of the world. In
recent years great changes have taken place in the
grasslands and few areas, in fact, have managed to
retain their original landscape. The grasslands have
been ploughed up for extensive, mechanized wheat
cultivation and are now the 'granaries of the world'.
Besides wheat, maize is increasingly cultivated
in the warmer and wetter areas. The tufted
grasses have been replaced by the more nutritious
lucerne or alfalfa grass for cattle and sheep rearing.
These temperate grasslands are now the leading
ranching regions of the globe. We shall now describe
more closely each of these economic activities.
1. Nomadic herding. This type of migratory animal
grazing has almost disappeared from the major
grasslands. The herders were wandering tribes, e.g.
the Kirghiz, the Kazakhs, and the Kalmuk. They
used to travel over long distances like the Bedouin
of the Arabian Desert, in search of grass and water
for their animals - cattle, sheep, goats and horses.
From these domesticated animals they obtained
meat, milk, wool, hides, bones and horn. You would
be surprised at the number of things they made out
of these. The wool was woven into felt for tents and
garments. The leather was used for making boots,
saddles and belts, which were very essential in a
country where the chief riding animal was the horse.
The bones and horns were not wasted but made into
tools, utensils and weapons. Many of their home-
made products were exchanged at trading posts or
with the caravans for guns, canned food, grains, tea,
coffee, sugar, medicines and other essential goods.
The harsh environment of the nomads, with long
droughts and unreliable showers made the Kirghiz
a tough and fearless people, known as 'the Tartars',
who had long resisted,subjugation by the Russians.
Now, however, under the Communist rdgime they
are being forced to settle down. The steppes which
they used to wander have been made into huge col;
lective farms and state farms for ranching or pro-
ducing cereals (Fig. 20.3).
2. Extensive mechanized wheat cultivation. The
temperate grasslands are ideal for extensive wheat
cultivation. The cool, moist spring stimulates early
growth and the light showers in the ripening period
help to swell the grains to ensure a good yield. The
warm, sunny summer is not only advantageous for
harvesting, but also enables the straw to be dried for
farm use. In addition, the levelness of the Steppes
and other temperate grasslands all over the world
makes ploughing and harvesting a comparatively
easy job. Mechanical ploughs loosen the soil and get
the fields ready for sowing in the shortest possible

) oou..o
/\
t
Fig.20.3 The Black Earth re-
gion of Ukraine, part of the
Eurasian Steooes.
2O.A The Prairies, Saskatchewan, Canada. Notice the grain
elevators by the railway line. National Film Board of Canada.
,.'P**'
Astrakhan
km
m iles 
3OO
lJ wn"u,
%l:;\:"^
*:',,::,
r"/:
,r': 
-:
--^ffi
4iii:a|;Xr'rdj
r93

time. In the Prairies (Plate 20.A), the Argentinian
Pampas, the Ukrainian Steppes, and the Downs of
Australia, combine-harvesters reap, thresh, winnow
and sack the grains almost as soon as the stalks are
gathered.
One distinct drawback of this form of extensive
mechanized farming is the consequent low yield. For
example, the average yield of wheat in the Prairies
is about | 547 kgper hectaref23 bushels per acre (1
bushel is approximately equivalent to 27 kg60lb.)
in weight or 36 litres (8 gallons in volume). In the
Pampas and the Australian Downs, the yields are
even lower, not more than 1 345 kg per hectare (20
bushels per acre)! In comparison, the wheat yield in
countries that practise intensive farming are much
higher, at times almost thrice the yield. It is 3 360 kg
per hectare (50 bushels per acre) in the United King-
dom, 3 830 kg (57 bushels) in Denmark and almost
3 968 kg (59 bushels) in the Netherlands! This is
attributed to the greater attention given to a smaller
piece of land, which is not practicable in the exten-
sive wheat-lands where a farmer owns anything from
245 to 16200 hectares (600 to 40,000 acres) as in the
Prairies. But if we consider the yield per man, this is
very much higher in the extensive farms. In this
respect, the sparsely populated temperate grasslands
of the mid-latitudes produce the grcatest quantity of
wheat per capita amongst the world's wheat-growing
nations. They are naturally the greatest wheat
exporters. Three-quarters of Canada's L0 million
tonnes of annual wheat production is exported,
mainly to Europe which does not produce sufficient
wheat to feed her very dense population, despite her
high wheat yield. Her wheat needs are so great that
20.8 A ship is loaded with grain for export at Port Arthur
Ontario. Poppertoto
shipments of wheat and flour arrive at her ports from
almost every part of the temperate grasslands, from
the U.S.A., Argentina, [Jruguay, Australia and the
U.S.S.R. (Plate 20.B).
Three-quarters of the world's wheat is winter
wheat, i.e. wheat sown in winter or late autumn. It
is a hard wheat with a low moisture content, being
ripened in the hot, sunny, continental summer. It is
best for breadmaking and is extensively traded.
Polewards, where the winter temperatures are too
cold for the wheat seedlings to survive, spring wheat
is grown. It is the less important soft wheat, more
suitable for making cakes, biscuits and pastes rather
=
io
tu
o
F-
Fig.2O.4 Wheat and beef
production in the North
American grasslands
^"""
$.s*- i
Ns-
ONTARIO
J
t94

than bread. In North America, winter wheat is dom-
inant south of the Great Lakes in the U.S.A., while
spring wheat is sown mainly in the Canadian Prairie
provinces of Alberta, Saskatchewan and Manitoba.
Scientific plant breeding has now devised cold-resist-
ant varieties that can mature within 110 days. This
has resulted in the northward extension of the wheat
cultivation into the Peace River region in 
'Canada
(Fig. 20.a). In the warmer, wetter regions, maize is
increasingly grown. (See also Chapter 26 page 239
'Extensive mechanized cereal cultivation').'
3. Pastoral farming. When pioneer settlers first
moved into the temperate grasslands, there were
very few animals. The natural conditions suit animal
farming. Subsequently, cattle, sheep, pigs and
horses were introduced, and they proved very suc-
cessful. With the development of refrigerated ships
in the late nineteenth century, the temperate grass-
lands became major pastoral regions, exporting
large quantities of beef, mutton, wool, hides. Milk,
butter, cheese and other dairy products are also
important in some parts of the North American
grasslands. The development was particularly spec-
tacular in the southern hemisphere (Figs. 20.5,20.6
and20.7), where the winters are milder and the rain-
fall is more evenly distributed. The original tuft-
Fig. 20.5 Sheep, caftle, wheat and maize production in
southern South America
Fig. 20.6 Agriculture in the veld of southern Africa
grass was ploughed up and replaced by sown alfalfa.
The semi-wild cattle in the Pampas were either
crossed with or replaced by the imported pedigree
stock from Europe. Soon the Pampas became so
involved with the pastoral industry that it took the
lead in the world's export of beef. Large estancias
(ranches) were established, linked to the frigorificos
(meat-packing factories) in the coastal ports by a
dense network of roads and railways. The growth
was rapid and towns like Buenos Aires, Bahia
Blanca, Fray Bentos and Montevideo became
known throughout the world (Fig. 20.5). This is also
true of other temperate grasslands. Much beef is
produced in the Great Plains of the U.S.A., and
Australia became the world's leading wool exporter,
accounting for a third of its total production. In the
Eurasian Steppes, too, increasing emphasis is being
placed on the ranching of animals for meat produc-
tion. (See also Chapter 26 page 231 'Pastoral farm-
ing'.)
Fi1.20.7 The wheat, maize. cattle and sheep producing
areas of Australia. Note the importance of the Downs
Nt
w

Ouestions and Exercises
1. Compare and contrast tropical and temperate
grasslands in respect of:
(a) their seasonal responses to climatic
changes;
(b) their economic importance.
2. Each of the following temperate grasslands is
paired with an important aspect of its economic
life. For any three of them, give a reasoned
account:
(a) Asiatic Steppes: nomadic herding;
(b) Canadian Prairies: spring wheat cultiva-
tion;
(c) Argentine Pampas: beef cattle ranching;
(d) South African Veld: maize growing;
(e) Australian Downs: sheep grazing.
3. Explain why:
(a) The annual temperature range of Winni-
peg, Canada is much greater than that of
Pretoria, South Africa.
(b) When Chinooks are more frequent in the
Prairies, the winters are milder.
(c) Wheat yields in the Pampas are much
lower than those of Denmark.
4. 'The temperate grasslands are the granaries of
the world.' To what extent is this true?
Account for the geographical factors that make
this possible.
5. Write a geographical account of the interna-
tional trade in wheat.
6. Examine Fig.2O.2(a) and 20.2(b) which show
two selected stations with a Steppe type of cli-
mate in the northern and southern hemisphere,
i.e. Winnipeg in the Canadian Prairies and Pre-
toria in the South African Veld.
(a) Why is the annual temperature range of
Winnipeg more than three times that of
Pretoria?
(b) Why is Pretoria wetter than Winnipeg?
(c) Why is Winnipeg below freezing-point for
more than 5 months ayear whilst this is not
so in Pretoria?
7. The following are brief descriptions of three
different types of climate:
(a) A large annual as well as diurnal range of
temperature, scattered rainfall brought by
thunderstorms and the mean daily temper-
ature is very high.
(b) A moderate annual range of temperature
around 7 "C (I2 oF), concentrated heavy
rain in the four summer months of the year
with frequent unpredictable spells of
drought or floods.
(c) A very large annual temperature range, as
much as 30 "C (70 "F), with very cold win-
ters but warm summers. Precipitation is in
the form of snow and rain, the latter occur-
ring mainly in the summer.
1. Name the climate which each of the
above represents.
ii. Name a station and an area which could
have each of the above climates.
iii. Give a full description of any one of the
above climates.
The Steppe type of climate supports most of
the following products: wheat, maize, sheep,
cattle. With the aid of sketch maps:
(a) Locate an area with the Steppe type of cli-
mate which is important for each of the
above products.
(b) Name three countries in the southern
hemisphere where all the above named
crops can be grown.
(c) Select any one of the above products and
describe the farming activities involved in
its production throughout the year.
Explain any two of the following:
(a) Steppelands of the northern hemisphere
are more extensive than those of the south-
ern hemisphere.
(b) In the southern hemisphere, the Steppe-
lands are located on the eastern parts
of continents.
(c) The Steppelands of the world are at best
moderately populated.
(a) Name the major temperate grasslands of
the world.
(b) Select any two from different hemispheres,
and make a comparative study of them
under the following headings:
i. relief;
ii. climate:
iii. economic activities;
iv. population distribution.
8.
9.
10.

Sample Objective Ouestions
1. The Steppe type of temperate con- 
A The ground is level 
4. The typical Steppe type ofclimate in
tinental climate is much milder in 
B Farming is intensive 
the northern hemisphere possesses
the southern hemisphere owing to 
C Grain elevators line the railways 
A a large annual temperature range
the 
D Farm animals are lacking 
B winter rain and summer drought
A absence of chinook winds 
C frequent thunderstorms
B influence of the cold currents 
D low relative humidity in the wet_
C tapering shape of the southern 3. Argentina is the leading beef expor- 
ter parts of the year
continents 
ter of the world. Which factor is de-
D presence of the on-shore wester- 
cisive in making this export trade 5. The native pastures of the river
lies 
rT;:T:r, high quarity of its beef 
ffi"oo 
of Eurasia comprises
2. Photograph 20.A on page 193 shows 
B low local meat consumption 
A lucerne grass
an aerial view of the Canadian 
C large-scale planting of nutritious 
B tussock grass
Prairies. Which description is not 
alfalfa grass 
C alfalfa grass
apt? 
D the introduction of refrigeration 
D lalang

