Chapter 16 The Tropical Monsoon and
Tropical Marine Climate
Distribution
We have learnt in Chapter 14 that some parts of the
world experience seasonal winds like land and sea
breezes but on a much larger scale. These are the
tropical monsoon lands with on-shore wet monsoons
in the summer and off-shore dry monsoons in the
winter. They are best developed in the sub-continent
of India, Pakistan and Bangladesh, Burma, Thai-
land, Laos, Kampuchea, parts of Vietnam and south
China and northern Australia. Outside this zone, the
climate is modified by the influence of the on-shore
Trade Winds all the year round, and has a more
evenly distributed rainfall. Such a climate, better
termed the Tropical Marine Climate, is experienced
in Central America, West Indies, north-eastein Aus-
tralia, the Philippines, parts of East Africa, Mala-
gasy, the Guinea Coast and eastern Brazil
(Fig. 16.1).
Glimatic Conditions in Tropical
Monsoon Lands
The basic cause of monsoon climates is the difference
in the rate of heating and cooling of land and sea.
In the summer, when the sun is overhead at the
Tropic of Cancer, the great land masses of the north-
ern hemisphere are heated. Central Asia, backed by
the lofty Himalayan ranges, is more than 9 "C (16 "F)
hotter than its normal temperature and a region of
intense low pressure is set up. The seas, which warm
up much slower, remain comparatively cool. At the
same time, the southern hemisphere experiences
winter, and a region of high pressure is set up in the
continental interior of Australia. Winds blow out-
wards as the South-East Monsoon. to Java. and after
crossing the equator are drawn towards the conti-
nental low pressure area reaching Indo-Pakistan as
the South-West Monsoon as shown in Fig. 16.2(a).
Fig. 16.1 The tropical monsoon and marine regions
NI
+
I
Tropical monsoon
Tropical marine
Scale 1: 215 000 000
Cairns
\- --s-----

Asiatic Low Pr€ssurs
'l:x'i,,",Nb
ruh,
il 
($Wu.\
-lNF;:::'J
'"lili")A. /c
TzNSY /
\ \Xb-\."
Fig. 16.2(a) Summer conditions in Asia-South-West Mon-
soon in Indo-Pakistan is on-shore in the rainy reason (July)
In the winter, conditions are reversed. The sun is
overhead at the Tropic of Capricorn and central Asia
is extremely cold, resulting in rapid cooling of the
land. A region of high pressure is created with out-
blowing winds-the North-East Monsoon. On cros-
sing the equator, the winds are attracted to the low
pressure centre in Australia and arrive in northern
Australia as the North-West Monsoon (Fig. 16.2b).
In other parts of the world which experience a tro-
pical monsoon climate a similar seasonal reversal of
wind directions occurs.
The Seasons of the Tropical Monsoon
Climate
In countries like India, Pakistan and Bangladesh
which have a true Tropical Monsoon Climate, three
distinct seasons are distinguishable, as illustrated in
Fig. 16.3.
1. The cool, dry season (October to February).
Temperatures are low, 24'C (76 'F) in Bom-
bay and only L0 'C (50 "F) in Punjab, with heavy
sinking air. Frosts may occur at night in the colder
north. The centre of high pressure is over the Pun-
jab. Outblowing dry winds, the North-East Mon-
soon, bring little or no rain at all to the sub-continent
of Indo-Pakistan. However, a small amount of rain
falls in Punjab from cyclonic sources and this is vital
for the survival of winter cereals. Where the North-
East Monsoon blows over the Bay of Bengal it
acquires moisture and thus brings rain to the south-
eastern tip of the peninsula at this time of the year.
For instance, in Madras 1 270 mm (50 inches) of rain
falls during October and November, accounting for
half its annual rainfall.
2. The hot dry season (March to mid-June). As can
be seen from Fig. 16.3, the temperature rises sharply
Fig. 16.2(b) Winter conditions in Asia-North-East Monsoon
in Indo-Pakistan is off-shore in the cool, dry season (January)
with the sun's northward shift to the Tropic of Can-
cer. Bombay has a mean May temperature of 30 "C
(86 "F) which is considered moderate, for many
parts of India are even hotter. The heat is so great
that schools and offices are closed. The stifling heat
and the low relative humidity make outdoor life
almost unbearaQle. Day temperatures of 35'C (95 "F)
are usual in central India and the mean temperature
Fig. 16.3
Tropical Monsoon Climate
Place: Bombay. India (18'55'N, 73"E)
Altitude: 11 m (37 feet)
Annual precipitation: 1 829mm (72 inches)
Annual temperature range: 6'C (30' - 24'CV10"F. (86" -
76'F.)
Rainfall
mm/in.
610124
559122
wal20
457 118
406/16
356/14
305112
254110
20aa
15216
10214
s',t12
%
32190
29185
27t80
24175
21t70
Temp.
"cloF.
I trot, dw ! rainv ! cool, dry
I Season I season I SeaSOn
N.E, Monsoon S.W. Monsoon N,E. Monsoon
Eombay: 
J 
F 
M A 
M J 
J 
A 
S 
O N D 
range/total
Temp.'C: 
24 24 27 2a n 
29 27 27 27 2A 21 25 6"C
'F.: 
76 76 80 83 86 84 81 81 81 82 8l 77 tO'F.
Precip.{mm): 2 
18 505 610 368 269 48 10 0 
t829mm
(inches):0.1 0.1 0 
071S924'145106190.4O 
T2inches
ls8

in Sind may be as high as 43 oC (110'F). Coastal dis-
tricts are a little relieved by sea breezes. There is
practically no rain anywhere. By May, the temper-
ature is so high that an intense low pressure zone is
set up in north-west India. Duststorms are frequent,
followed by long awaited rainstorms that'break' by
the middle of June. The transitional period between
'no rain' and 'plenty of rain' is over.
3. The rainy season (mid-June to September). With
the 'burst' of the South-West Monsoon in mid-June,
torrential downpours sweep across the country to the
delight of everybody. Almost all the rain for the year
falls within this rainy season. For example in Bom-
bay 505 mm (20 inches) are recorded in June,
610 mm (24 inches) in July, 368 mm (14.5 inches) in
August and a further 269 mm (10.6 inches) in Sep-
tember. As much as 95 per cent of the annual rainfall
is concentrated within four months. This pattern of
concentrated heavy rainfall in summer is a charac-
teristic feature of the Tropical Monsoon Climate.
The torrential downpours have an immediate impact
on the local temperature. They lower the tempera-
ture considerably. The mean temperature for Bom-
bay is 30'C (86'F) in May but only 27'C (81 'F) in
July. In the north the drop is even greater as much
as 7 "C (13 'F). Some of the windward stations on
Himalayan foothills have very heavy rainfall, though
this is partly orographic. Cherrapunji has an average
annual rainfall of 10 795 mm (425 inches) and a
record of 22987 mm (905 inches) in 1861.
The Retreating Monsoon
The amount and frequency of rain decreases towards
the end of the rainy season. It 'retreats' gradually
southwards after mid-September until it 'leaves' the
continent altogether. The Punjab plains which
receive the South-West Monsoon earliest are the
first to see the withdrawal of the monsoon. The skies
are clear again and the cool, dry season returns in
October, with the outblowing North-East Monsoon.
The role of monsoons in India is vital in its econ-
omy. A late monsoon or one that ends far too early
will condemn large stretches of agricultural land to
drought. There will be widespread famine from crop
failure and thousands will perish. When there is too
much water from the rainy monsoons, severe floods
occur, destroying both crops and lives and disrupting
communications. In no part of the world has the cli-
mate affected Man's way of life so profoundly as in
the monsoon lands.
The Tropical Marine Climate
This type of climate is experienced along the eastern
coasts of tropical lands, receiving steady rainfall
from the Trade Winds all the time. The rainfall is
both orographic where the moist Trades meet
upland masses as in eastern Brazil, and convectional
due to intense heating during the day and in sum-
mer. Its tendency is towards a summer maximum as
in monsoon lands, but without any distinct dry
period. Fig. 16.4 shows the rhythm of climate as
experienced in Cairns, on the eastern coast of
Queensland, under the constant influence of the
South-East Trade Winds, and in summer also
affected by the tropical monsoons. Its wettest
months are in January 401 mm (15.8 inches), Feb-
ruary 416 mm (16.4 inches), March 450 mm (17.7
inches) and April 307 mm (12.1 inches), which is
summer in the southern hemisphere. Approximately
70 per cent of the annual rainfall is concentrated in
the four summer months. There is no month without
any rainfall. The range of temperature is typical of
the tropical latitudes with a maximum of 28 "C
(82'F.) in January and a minimum of 21 "C (70'F.)
in July-a range of 6'6'C (12 "F.) for the year. Due
Fi9.16.4
Tropical Marine Climate
Place: Cairns, Australia (17'S, 145" 42' E)
Altitude: Coastal lowland
Annual precipitation: 2 235 mm (88 inches)
Annual temperature range: 7 "C (2ff - 21 'Fll12 'F. (82' -
70'F.)
Rainfal
mm/in
29las
27180
24175
21170
18/65
Temp.
ocl"F.
508/
457 11
356/14
305/1
254t1
20314
15216
102t4
,',t12
0/0 J FM
MJ 
J
months
Cairns:
temp. L:
t_:
Precip. (mm):
linch*l
JFMAMJJASOND
28 27 27 23 23 22 21 2l 23 24 26 27
82 8l 80 77 74 71 10 70 73 76 79 8'l
401 417 450 3)7 109 71 4t 43 43 46 10? 2t8
158 164 17.7 12.1 4.3 2.8 1.6 1.7 r.7 t8 4.0 8.6
rtngc/tottl
7"c
12" F
2 235 mm
88 Inch6
1s9

to the steady influence of the Trades, the Tropical
Marine Climate is more favourable for habitation,
but it is prone to severe tropicd cyclones, hurricanes
or typhoons, as mentioned in Chapter 14.
Natural Vegetation
The natural vegetation of tropical monsoon lands
depends on the amount of summer rainfall. The
monsoon lands with three distinct seasons, cold, hot
and rainy exert great influence on the appearance of
the vegetation. Trees have to be fairly tolerant of
local physical and climatic conditions to survive. They
grow rapidly in the rainy season, shed their leaves
during the hot dry season and remain comparatively
inactive in the cool season. Trees are normally
deciduous since they shed their leaves during the hot
dry season to withstand excessive transpiration.
The overall vegetation varies from dense tropical
evergreen vegetation to thorny scrubland due to dif-
ferences in precipitation in different parts of the
monsoon lands. Where the rainfall is heavy, e.g.
southern Burma, peninsular India, northern Aus-
tralia and coastal regions with a tropical marine cli-
mate, the resultant vegetation is forest. The forests
ate more open and less luxurianl than the equatorial
forest with far fewer species. The less dense forest
allows more sunlight to reach the ground, resulting
in denser undergrowth. Bamboo thickets which pre-
dominate in regions of intermediate rainfall often
grow to great heights (Fig. L6.5 and Plate 16.,4,).
With the decrease in rainfall in summer, the for-
ests thin out into thorny scrubland or savanna with
scattered trees and tall grass. In parts of Indo-pak-
istan, rainfall is so deficient that semi-desert condi-
tions are encountered-
Fig. 16.5 Main features of a monsoon forest
ftlm
16.4 A bamboo thicket in the tropics Goh Cheng Leong
Most of the forests yield valuable timber and are
prized for their durable hardwoods. Teak is the best
known among these hardwoods. Burma alone
accounts for as much as three-quarters of the world's
production. It is so durable a timber that it is exten-
sively used for shipbuilding, furniture and construc-
tional purposes. Other kinds of timber include sal,
acacia and some varieties of eucalyptus in northern
Australia.
Agricultural Development in the
Monsoon Lands
Much of the monsoon forest has been cleared for
agriculture to support the very dense population.
The cultural landscape throughout the length and
breadth of the monsoon lands deeply reflects the
intensity of Man's quest for subsistence. Wherever
possible, crops are grown. The plains are ploughed,
and the hills are terraced to provide farmland. Farms
are small and the people are forever'land hungry'.
In their quest for land, they have removed the nat-
ural vegetation, sometimes wantonly, resulting in
acute soil erosion. This is particularly serious in the
sub-continent of India, which has a population of
w' 
qrQ. : anrl snru os;ilt///i!ilLl!iiy"*... .:,,w w,t" l
g l gf4rraza.l!17;,.::-'.!i.i "'. : 
...nilttu,,., u".,,b,. . .,r/b d .., u.b-

over 625 million, increasing at the rate of 12 million
a year. But in the plains the same piece of land may
have been tilled for generations with little or no
replenishment, and yet be able to yield fairly rea-
sonable returns when irrigated.
Tropical agriculture dependent on natural rainfall
and a large labour force, reaches its greatest mag-
nitude in the monsoon lands. The soil provides the
basis for the livelihood of millions. Farming is not
only the dominant occupation of the greater part of
the people, but also forms the mainstay of the econ-
omy of Indo-Pakistan, China, South-EastAsia, east-
ern Brazil and the West Indies. The following types
of agriculture are recognizable.
1. 'Wet padi cultivation. Rice is the most important
staple crop and is grown in tropical lowlands wher-
ever the rain exceeds 1 780 mm (70 inches). It is
perhaps the most characteristic crop of the monsoon
lands and its total acreage far exceeds that of any
other crops. In fact, very few areas outside the influ-
ence of the monsoons ever take to the cultivation of
padi. There are two main varieties, the wet ,padi,
which is mainly grown on lowlands in flooded fields
or in terraced uplands, and the dry p'adi grown in
regions of lower rainfall. A minimum of 1 270 mm
(50 inches) of rainfall is required during the growing
season. Droughts and floods that are almost inse-
parable from a monsoonal type of climate can be
very detrimental to its cultivation. Irrigation water
from rivers, canals, dams or wells is extensively used
in the major rice-producing countries. Other food
crops like maize, millet, sorghum, wheat, gram and
beans are of subsidiary importance. They are culti-
vated in the drier or cooler areas where rice cannot
be grown.
2. Lowland cash crops. A wide range of lowland
tropical cash crops are cultivated for the export mar-
ket, after local needs have been met. The most
important crop in this category is cane sugar. As
much as two-thirds of the world's sugar production
comes from tropical countries. Sugar is either grown
on plantations or on smallholdings wherever rainfall
and sunshine are abundant (Plate 16.8). Some of the
major producers include India, Java, Taiwan, Cuba,
Jamaica, Trinidad and Barbados. Jute is confined
almost entirely to the Ganges-Brahmaputra delta, in
India and Bangladesh. It has long been a leading
hard fibre for the manufacture of sacks (gunny).
Manila hemp (abaca) is a product of the Philippines,
particularly of Mindanao. It is used to make high
quality rope. Other crops include indigo, still culti-
vated in India and Java; cotton, a major export of
Indo-Pakistan and banana, coconuts and spices.
3. Hlghland plantation farming. The colonlzation of
tropical lands by Europeans gave rise to a new form
of cultivated landscape in the cooler monsoonal
highlands. This is the cultivation of certain tree crops
in tropical plantations. Thousands of hectares of
tropical upland forest were cleared to make way for
plantation agriculture in which tea and coffee are the
most important crops. These were luxuries in
Europe in the eighteenth century and the products
of the plantations were originally meant only for
export to the mother countries where there was a
greatcraze for the beverages. Later, the local people
also got into the habit of drinking them and they
quickly became necessities. Both the beverages
became so popular in and out of the tropics that
there was great expansion in their acreages both in
regions with a Tropical Monsoon Climate and Trop-
ical Marine Climate.
Coffee (Fig. 16.6) originated in Ethiopia, where
it is still grown, but Brazil now aocounts for about
a quarter of the world's production of coffee. It is
mainly grown on the eastern slopes of the Brazilian
plateau. The crop is also cultivated on the highland
slopes between 6(X) metres (2,000 feet) and 1 370
metres (4,500 feet) in the Central American states,
India and eastern Java.
16.8 Harvesting sugar.oane in Oueensland, Australia Au-
stralian News and lnformation Bureau

Fig. 16.6 Coffee berries and leaves
Tea (Fig. 16.7) originated in China and is still an
important crop there, as it requires moderate tem-
peratures of about 16'C (60 oF), heavy rainfall of
over L 520 mm (60 inches) and well-drained high-
land slopes. It thrives well in the tropical monsoon
zone, but preferably at a higher altitude. The best
regions are thus the Himalayan foothills of India and
Bangladesh, the central highlands of Sri Lanka and
western Java, from all of which it is exported (Plate
16.C). In China, tea is grown mostly for local con-
sumption. (Also see Chapter 26, page239.)
4. Lumbering. Wherever there are tropical forests
which still have not been felled to make way for the
plough, lumbering is undertaken in the more acces-
sible areas. This is particularly important in conti
nental South-East Asia. Of the tropical deciduous
trees, teak, of which Burma is the leading producer,
is perhaps the most sought after. It is valuable on
account of its great durability, strength, immunity to
shrinkage, fungus attack and insects. It is grown in
hilly districts up to 900 metres (3,000 feet) in altitude
with a moderate rainfall. Under government super-
vision, teak trees which are cut have to be replaced.
Tea picking in a plantation in Sri Lanka Camera Press
t62

This is the only way to ensure the steady supply of
the timber which is the second greatest money-
earner for Burma after rice. In northern Burma, in
the region of the Chindwin River, there are large
teak plantations. It takes as long as L00 years for a
teak tree to mature into commercial timber. Green
teak logs are so heavy that they will not float readily
on water. It is therefore necessary to 'poison' the
tree several years before actual felling, so that it is
dry and light enough to be floated down the Chind-
win and the Irrawaddy to reach the sawmills at Ran-
goon. The individual iogr ure tied in rafts and guided
downstream by crews of men and tugboats. It takes
something like 18 months for a log of teak to reach
Rangoon to be sawn into planks for export.
5. Shifting cultivation. This most primitive form of
farming is widely practised. Instead of rotating the
crops in the same field to preserve fertility, the
tribesmen move to a new clearing when their first
field is exhausted. The clearing, or field, in the midst
of the jungle is usually made by fire, which destroys
practically everything in its way. After planting, litfle
attention is paid to the field either in weeding or
manuring. The crops are left entirely to the care of
nature. The farmers use simple hoes and sticks for
ploughing and seeding. Draught animals are
unknown and labour is exclusively manual. Their
needs are so basic that every farmer produces much
the same range of crops as his neighbours. Maize or
corn, dry padi, yams, tapioca, sweet potatoes and
some beans are the most common crops. Farming is
entirely for subsistence, i.e. everything is consumed
by the farmer's family, it is not traded or sold.
As tropical soils are mainly latosolic, rapidly
leached and easily exhausted, the first'crop may be
bountiful but the subsequent harvests deteriorate.
'Weeds soon invade the plot. A few years later, the
field has to be abandoned and a new patch cleared
elsewhere. This system of a short period of cultiva-
tion alternating with long periods of fallowing is
probably the best way of using land in many parts
of the tropics, especially where slopes are too steep
for the usual kinds of permanent cultivation.
Shifting cultivation is so widely practised amongst
indigenous people that different local names are
used in different countries. For example , ladang in
Malaysia, taungya in Burma, tamrai in Thailand,
caingin in the Philippines, humah in Java, chena in
Sri Lanka and milpa in Africa and Central America.
(Also see Chapter 26, page 246,Primitive Subsist-
ence Agriculture.)
Ouestions and Exercises
1. The climate of India is characterized by three
distinct seasons. Explain why this is so.
2. With the aid of diagrams or sketch maps,
explain any three of the following state-
ments:
(a) The east coast of continents within the
tropics have heavier rainfall than the inte-
riors or the west coasts.
(b) The Tropical Monsoon Climate resembles
land and sea breezes on a continental
scale.
(c) Near the equatorial latitudes, the period of
maximum rainfall is closely related to the
movements of the overhead sun.
(d) There is a marked difference in tempera-
ture between the east and west coasts of
countries in latitudes 20o to 35" N.
3. In which parts of the monsoon lands has the
natural vegetation been removed by men?
Describe and explain the uses made of the
cleared lands.
Name the types of climate which have:
(a) rain only in winter;
(b) rain only in summer;
(c) rain throughout the year.
i. Describe the characteristic climatic fea-
tures of any two of the types you have
named.
ii. For any one of them account for its rain-
fall distribution.
Contrast the essential characteristics of plan-
tation agriculture and shifting cultivation.
(a) In the map of the world shade areas which
have
i. a tropical monsoon climate;
ii. a tropical marine climate.
(b) State the distinct differences between the
tropical monsoon and the tropical marine
climate.
(c) Explain why regions outside the tropics do
not experience the monsoon type of cli-
mate.
4.
5.
6.
r63

7.
(a) The sub-continent of Indo-Pakistan has the
typical type of tropical monsoon climate
caused by pronounced seasonal pressure
changes on both sides of the equator. With
the aid of an annotated map showing the
pressure systems and wind flow, explain
what causes tropical monsoon weather.
(b) Name other countries outside the sub-con-
tinent of Indo-'Pakistan which also have
this type of tropical monsoon climate.
(a) What type of natural vegetation is found
in the tropical monsoon lands?
(b) Name three common species of trees found
in monsoon lands.
(c) What major factors determine the broad
distribution of natural vegetation within
the monsoon lands?
(d) With the aid of a sketch map show the dis-
tribution of the major types of natural veg-
etation in Indo-Pakistan.
(a) Draw a large sketch map to show the chief
rice-growing lands of Asia.
(b) Why are these areas particularly suited to
rice-cultivation?
(c) Name three areas outside Asia where rice
is also grown commercially.
(a) Tea, coffee, cotton and sugar-cane are
some of the major crops grown in monsoon
lands. On the map of the world, shade and
name an area where each of these crops is
grown in very large quantities.
(b) Give reasons for the large-scale cultivation
of either tea and cotton or coffee and
sugar-cane in the areas you indicated in
(a).
(c) Name three major importers for both tea
and coffee.
10.
8.
Sample Objective Ouestions
1. The natural vegetation of monsoon
lands varies greatly being much de-
pendent on the
A rainfall distribution
B drainage pattern
C quality of the soil
D intensity of sunlight
2. The basic cause of the tropical mon-
soon type of climate is
A regional differences in tempera-
ture
B the warming effect of the off-
shore currents
C the seasonal reversal of wind
direction
D the pattern of relief features
3. Large areas of troPical monsoon
lands are
A inhabited by European colonizers
B densely populated
C suited to large-scale pastoral
farming
D not fit for the cultivation of in-
dustrial crops
4. The most outstanding charact€ristic
of the tropical monsoon climate is its
A concentrated heavY summer rain
B frequent light winter showers
C distinct four seasons: spring, sum'
mer, autumn, winter
D alternate dry and wet months
throughout the year
5. The undergrowth in the tropical
monsoon forest is denser than that of
the equatorial rain forest because
A the summer heat is greater
B rain is more evenly distributed
C the forest is more open
D the soil is more fertile
t64

