Chapter 5 Landforms made by Running Water
Fig. 5.1 The hydrological cycle: evaporation from sea and
land forms clouds which condense into rain that falls to earth
as run-off or percolates to form groundwater. or is absorbed
The Development of a River System
When rain falls, part of it sinks into the ground,
some is evaporated back into the atmosphere and
the rest runs off as rivulets, brooks, streams and tri-
butaries of rivers that flow down to the sea
(Fig. 5.1). This running water forms a potent agent
for denuding the Earth's surface. Unlike glaciers and
snow, which are confined to the cold and temperate
latitudes; waves which act only on coastlines; winds,
which are only 'efficient' in deserts; the effect of run-
ning water is felt all over the globe wherever water
is present. Running water is thus the most important
single agent of denudation.
The source of a river may be a spring, a lake or
a marsh, but it is generally in an upland region,
where precipitation is heaviest and where there is a
slope down which the'run-of? can flow. The uplands
therefore form the catchment areas of rivers. The
crest of the mountains is the divide or watershed
from which streams flow down the slopes on both
sides to begin their journey to the oceans. The initial
stream that exists as a consequence of the slope is
called the consequent stream. As the consequent
stream wears down the surface by deepening its
channel downwards, it is joined by several tributa-
by plants or evaporated again to form clouds. The cycle is
repeated when clouds are condensed to fall as rain.
ries either obliquely or at right angles depending on
the alignment and the degree of resistance of the
rocks.
If the rocks are composed of homogeneous beds
of uniform resistance to erosion, the tributaries will
join the main valley obliquely as insequent streams.
Fig. 5.2 Dendritic ortree-likedrainage pattern developed on
homogeneous rock or beds of equal resistance

Fig. 5.3 Trellised or rectangular drainage pattern developed
on alternating outcrops of harder and softer rocks
The drainage pattern so evolved will be treeJike in
appearance, and is therefore described as dendritic
drainage, after a Greek word dendron meaning
'tree' (Fig. 5.2). On the other hand, if the rocks are
made up of alternate bands of hard and soft rocks,
the tributaries tend to follow the pattern of. the rock
structure. If the outcrops of the rocks occur at right
angles to the main valley, the tributaries will join it
at right angles as subsequent streams. The drainage
pattern so developed will be rectangular in shape
and is called trellised drainage (Fig. 5.3).
Streams flowing outwards and downhill from a
dome or volcanic cone give rise to a radial drainage
pattern just like the spokes of a bicycle wheel
(Fig. 5.a). An example of radial drainage pattern is
seen on Mount Egmont in North Island, New Zea-
land.
The Mechanics of Humid Erosion
Humid erosion covers the entire scope of sculpturing
effects of running water from the action of rain,
Fig. 5.4 Radial drainage pattern developed down a dome or
volcanic cone
water to that of the rivers. But erosion cannot take
place unless the rocks are first weakened or shat-
tered by exposure to the €lements. Rain, frost and
wind weather the rocks so that they can be eroded
more easily. Mass movements of earth and weath-
ered materials on hill slopes down to the valleys are
mainly due to the lubricating action of water which
allows a mass of materials to move under gravity.
This is particularly acute where the slopes are steep.
The slow movement of soil down a hill slope is called
soil-creep. A more sudden movement due to the
lubricating effect or rain-water may cause wide-
spread landslides.
The Processes of River Action
When a river flows, it carries with it eroded mate-
rials. These comprise the river's load, and may be
divided into three distinct types.
l. Materials in solution. These are minerals which
are dissolved in the water.
2. Materials in suspension. Sand, silt and mud are
carried along suspended in the water as the stream
flows.
3. The traction load. This includes coarser materials
such as pebbles, stones, rocks and boulders, which
are rolled along the river bed (Fig. 5.5).
It has been estimated that for every square kilo-
metre of the earth's surface, more than 78 000 kg
(200 tonnes). of solid materials in suspension and
more than 20 000 kg (50 tonnes) of materials in sol-
ution are being carried offby runningwater every year.
Fig. 5.5 A river with materials in solution, suspension and
the traction load

The Mississippi River which drains an area almost
half the size of the United States itself, removes
more than two million tonnes of eroded material
into the Gulf of Mexico daily. Consequently, the
river basins are being lowered, and in the case of
swift-flowing rivers like the Irrawaddy, its drainage
basin is being lowered by about a third of a metre
in every 400 years! During floods the amount of rock
debris swept off by rivers is very much greater. We
can see this from the mud that colours the river-
water during a heavy rain. The ability of a river to
move the various grades of materials depends
greatly upon the volume of the water, the velocity of
the flow and lastly the size, shape and weight of the
load. It is said that by doubling the velocity of a
river, its transporting power is increased by more
than 10 times! It is therefore not surprising to find
huge boulders that are 'stranded' in normal times,
but may be moved during seasonal floods. The
movement of debris by rivers is thus intermittent,
acting vigorously in certain parts of the year and
remaining less active at other times.
River Erosion and Transportation
In rivers, erosion and transportation go on simulta-
neously, comprising the following inter-acting pro-
cesses.
l. Corrasion or abrasion. This is the mechanical
Fig. 5.6 The graded long profile and typical cross-section of
a river from source to mouth.
l. Upper or Mountain cou6e 
2 Middle or Valley course
grinding of the river's traction load against the banks
qnd bed of the river. The rock fragments are hurled
against the sides of the river and also rolled along
the bottom of the river. Corrasion takes place, in
two distinct ways.
(a) Lateral corrasion. This is the sideways erosion
which widens the V-shaped valley.
(b) Vertical corrasion. This is the downward action
which deepens the river channel.
2. Corrosion or solution. This is the chemical or sol-
vent action of water on soluble or partly-soluble
rocks with which the river comes into contact. For
example, calcium carbonate in limestones is easily
dissolved and removed in solution.
3. Hydraulic action. This is the mechanical loosen-
ing and sweeping away of materials by the river
water itself. Some of the water splashes against the
river banks and surges into cracks and crevices. This
helps to disintegrate the rocks. The water also under-
mines the softer rocks with which it comes into con-
tact. It picks up the loose fragments from its banks
and bed and transports them away (Fig. 5.7).
4. Attrition. This is the wear and tear of the trans-
ported materials themselves when they roll and col-
lide with one another. The coarser boulders are
broken down into smaller stones; the angular edges
are smoothened and rounded to form pebbles. The
finer materials are carried further downstream to be
deposited.
3. Lower or Plain coune
qorge
rapids and waterfalls
nver captu re
interlocking spurs
rneanders
rivcr cl iffs
flood plains
ox-bow lakes
deltas
pled.o.m.lr.r.g!'tt ly : ;., :, 9ro9io1
lransportat ron
deposition
vertrcal corrasion
alluvium deposition
steepgorqe.likeorVshapedvalley open.wicleninggently-slopingvalley 
verygently-sloping,smooth,widevalley

The Gourse of a River
The course of a river may be divided into three dis-
tinct parts (Fig.5.6). 1. The upper or mountain
course (in the stage of youth), 2. The middle or val-
ley course (in the stage of maturity), 3. The lower
or plain course (in the stage of old age).
A deep gorge in the Cuzco of Peru Popperfoto
5.A
w
THE UPPER OR MOUNTAIN COURSE
This begins at the source of the river near the
watershed, which is probably the crest of a mountain
range. The river is very swift as it descends the steep
slopes, and the predominant action of the river is
vertical corrasion. The valley developed is thus
deep, narrow and distinctively V-shaped. Down-cut-
ting takes place so rapidly that lateral corrasion can-
not keep pace. In some cases where the rocks are
very resistant, the valley is so narrow and the sides
are so steep that gorges are formed, e.g. the Indus
Gorge in Kashmir. In arid regions, where there is
little rainfall to widen the valley sides, and the river
cuts deep into the valley-floor, precipitous valleys
called canyons are formed, e.g. the Bryce Canyon,
Utah, U.S.A.
Some of the more outstanding features that are
often best developed in the upper course of a river
include the following.
l. River capture. This is also known as river pir-
acy or river beheading. Its development is depen-
dent on the different rate of back-cutting (headward
erosion) into a divide. For instance, if one side of
the divide is of greater gradient or receives more
precipitation than the other, stream A in Fig. 5.8
will cut back more rapidly than stream B. Its greater
erosive power will succeed in enlarging its basin at
the expense of the weaker stream. Stream A may
eventually break through the divide and capture or
pirate stream B. The bend at which the piracy
occurred is termed as the elbow of capture. The
beheaded stream (Z) is called the misfit. The valley
below the elbow is the wind gap, and may be valu-
able as a road and rail route. Examples of river cap-
ture abound. In Burma, the Upper Sittang has been
captured by the Irrawaddy; in Northumberland,
Fig. 5.8 River capture
(a) before capture (b) after capture
o, Waf"ttn"O
A-piraling stream
B-oirated stream
X-elbow of capture
Y -wind gap
Z -beheaded l'
8a
(a)
Fig. 5.7 Pot-holes and rounded pebbles in a river bed
slream or mistit

Fig.5.9 Rapids,cataracts
England, the Blyth and the Wansbeck are beheaded
by the North Tyne.
2. Rapids, cataracts and waterfalls. These are
liable to occur at any part of the river course, but
they are most numerous in the mountain course
where changes of gradient are more abrupt and also
more frequent. Due to the unequal resistance of
hard and soft rocks traversed by a river, the outcrop
of a band of hard rock may cause a river to 'jump'
or'fall' downstream. Rapids are formed (Fig. 5.9).
Similar falls of greater dimensions are also referred
to as cataracts, of which there are five along the Nile
that interrupt smooth navigation. When rivers
plunge down in a sudden fall of some height, they
are called waterfalls (Fig. 5.10). Their great force
usually wears out a plunge-pool beneath. Waterfalls
are formed in several ways.
(a) When a bar of resistant rock lies transversely
across a river valley, e.g. the Niagara Falls, U.S.A.,
which is 50 metres (167 feet) high (Plate 5.B) and
the Kaieteur Falls in Guyana 251 metres (825 feet)
high.
(b) When a fault-line scarp caused by faulting lies
across a river, e.g. Victoria Falls on the River Zam-
besi, plunging 100 metres (360 feet).
Fig. 5.10 A waterfall with plunge pool
5.8 The spectacular Niagara Falls Servizio Editoriale
Fotografico
(c) When water plunges down the edge of a pla-
teau like the River Zaire which leaps for 270 metres
(900 feet) through a series of more than 30 rapids as
Livingstone Falls.
(d) Glaciation produces hanging valleys where trib-
utary streams reach the main U-shaped valley below
as waterfalls, e.g. the Yosemite Falls of California
with a total descent of 780 metres (2,560 feet).
THE MIDDLE OR VALLEY COURSE
In the middle course, lateral corrasion tends to pre-
dominate over vertical corrasion. Active erosion of
the banks widens the V-shaped valley. The volume
of water increases with the confluence of many tri-
butaries and this increases the river's load. The work
of the river is predominantly transportation with
Fig. 5.11 Interlocking spurs
5l

some deposition. Downstream, the interlocking
spurs (Fig. 5.11) that project from both sides of the
valley are cut back into a line of bluffs. Rain-wash,.
soil creep, landslides and gullying gradually widen
the valley, cutting back the sides. The river's treble
task of valley-cutting, bed-smoothing and debris-
removal are being carried out in a more tranquil
manner than in the mountain course though the
velocity does not decrease. Some of the load is
dropped or deposited. Again this depends on the
volume of flow, for in the event of flood, the river's
erosive power and its capability for load-carrying is
greatly increased. The more outstanding features
associated with the valley course are these.
1. Meanders. As water flowing under gravity sel-
dom flows straight for any long distance, a winding
course soon develops. The irregularities of the
ground force the river to swing in loops, forming
meanders, a term derived from the winding River
Meanderez in Asia Minor. The mechanics of mean-
der formation is illustrated in Fig. 5.12 (See Plate
s.c).
2. River cliffs and slip-off slopes. When the flow
of water PQ (in Fig.5.12) enters the bend of the
river, it dashes straight into Q, eroding the outer
bank into a steep river-cliff at Q. The water piles up
on the outside of the bend because of the centrifugal
force. A bottom current RS is set up in a cork-screw
motion and is hurled back into mid-stream and the
inner bank. Shingle is thus deposited here at S,
where the slip-off slope is very gentle. The outer
bank is therefore the bank of continuous erosion and
the inner bank is the bank of continual deposition.
3. Interlocking spurs. As the stream flows on, the
meanders migrate progressively outwards with the
interlocking spurs alternating with the undercut
PO=flow ol water r-------r\
RS=bottom current --t
Fig. 5.12 Meanders
(a) the develoPment of meanders
(b) cross-section of a meander
slopes as shown in Fig. 5.11. It must be pointed out
at this stage that meanders in the middle course are
only the beginning of the downstream swing, for
bends are restricted by the interlocking spurs. In the
lower course, the loops are enlarged across the level
plain and meanders are fully developed.
THE LOWER OR PLAIN COURSE
The river moving downstream across a broad, level
plain is heavy with debris brought down from the
upper course. Vertical corrasion has almost ceased
though lateral corrasion still goes on to erode its
banks further. The work of the river is mainly dep-
osition, building up its bed and forming extensive
flood plains. The volume of water is greatly swelled
5.C The Sungai Muara in Negri Sembilan. The river swings
from side to side in tight meanders. Note the sand deposited
on the slip-off slope. G.C. Morgan
(a) The development of meanders
(b) Cross-section of a meandel

by the additional tributaries that join the main
stream. Coarse materials are dropped and the finer
silt is carried down towards the mouth of the river.
Large sheets of materials are deposited on the level
plain and may split the river into several complicated
channels, so that it can be described as a braided
stream. Some of the major plain course features are
the following.
1. Flood plain. Rivers in their lower course carry
large quantities of sediments. During annual or spo-
radicfloods, these materials are spread over the low-
lying adjacent areas. A layer of sediment is thus
deposited during each flood, gradually building up
a fertile flood plain (Fig. 5.13). When the river flows
normally its bed is raised through the accumulation
of deposits and material is also dropped on the sides
forming raised banks called levees. It will not be long
before the water-level flows dangerously close to the
top of the levees. In an attempt to minimize the risk
of floods, artificial embankments are erected on the
natural levees, but this allows the. river to rise fur-
ther. When they can no longer withstand the pres-
sure of the flood water, the banks burst, damaging
properties and drowning thousands. Disastrous
floods of this nature frequently occur in the Chang
Jiang (Yangtze Kiang), Mississippi, Po and Ganges
Plains. But the best known river for floods is the
Huang He (Hwang Ho), 'China's Sorrow', where
millions have perished. For example, in 1852 the
Huang He (Hwang Ho) breached its bank, killing g
million people and did untold damage to farms and
properties. The river's course was diverted over
480 km (300 miles) away, draining into the Gulf of
Pohai, instead of the Yellow Sea. Nowadays, huge
dredges help to deepen the channels to avoid exces-
sive sedimentation.
2. Ox-bow lakes. These are also known as cut-ofrs
or bayous in the Mississippi basin. In the lower
course of a river, a meander becomes very much
more pronounced. The outside bend or concave
bank is so rapidly eroded that the river becomes
almost a complete circle. There will come a time
when the river cuts through the narrow neck of the
Fig. 5.13 Section of a flood plain (with levee and artificial
embankmentl
Fig. 5.14 The formation of an ox-bow lake
loop, abandoning an ox-bow lrke or tnortlake
(meaning dead lake). The river then flows straight.
The ox-bow lake will later degenerate into a swamp
through subsequent floods that may silt up the lake.
It becomes marshy, and eventually dries up
(Fig. s.la).
3. Delta. When a river reaches the sea, the fine
materials it has not yet dropped are deposited at its
mouth, forming a fan-shaped alluvial area called a
delta, a word which originated from the Greek letter
A which closely resembled the triangular delta of
the Nile (Fig. 5.15). This alluvial tract is, in fact, a
seaward extension of the flood plain. Due to the
obstruction caused by the deposited alluvium, the
river may discharge its water through several chan-
nels called distributaries. Some deltas are extremelv
Fig.5.15
The formation of dehas
(al stages in the formation of a delta
i. rivd ratchos cori lnd
d.ffiits!0dimanB
iii.dcl6 tak6 a chdddi$ic fan
shepc oxl€nding sidaways and
stwards.
(b) section through th6 lowor couree of a river,
flood plain and delta
showing

large. For instance, the Ganges delta is almost as big
as the whole of Peninsular Malaysia. Deltas extend
sideways and seawards at an amazing rate. The
River Po extends its delta by over 12 metres (40
feet) a year. The town of Adria, located nearly 24
km (15 miles) inland was a seaport in the time of
Christ!
Deltas differ much in their size, shape, growth and
importance. A number of factors such as the rate of
sedimentation, the depth of the river and the sea-
bed. and the character of the tides, currents and
waves greatly influence the eventual formation of
deltas. For this reason, several types of delta are rec-
ognizable. The Mississippi has a bird's-foot delta,
with several main branches like the foot of a bird
extending into the Gulf of Mexico (Fig. 5.16a). The
Nile, Ganges and Mekong have the fan-shaped,
arcuate deltas with numerous distributaries
(Fig. 5.16b). Some other rivers such as the Ama-
Fig. 5.16(a) A bird's foot delta, e.g. River Mississippi
Fig. 5,16(b) An arcuate delta, e.g. River Nile
Fig. 5.16(c) An estuarine delta, e.g. River Ob
zon, Ob and Vistula have their deltas partly sub-
merged in coastal waters to form estuarine deltas
(Fig. 5.16c). A few rivers like the Ebro of Spain
have tooth-like projections at their mouths. These
are known as cuspate deltas.
The following summarizes the conditions favour-
able for the formation of deltas.
(a) Active vertical and lateral erosion in the
upper course of the river to provide extensive sedi'
ments to be eventually deposited as deltas.
(b) The coast should be sheltered preferably tide-
less.
(c) The sea adjoining the delta should be shallow
or else the load will disappear in the deep waters.
(d) There should be no large lakes in the river
course to 'filter off' the sediments.
(e) There should be no strong current running at
right angles to the river mouth, washing away the
sediments.
Bird's foot delta
stuarine delta 
SEA
Arcuate delta SEA 
Spit

River Rejuvenation
The earth's crust is far from stable and it is not sur-
prising that, in the course of a river's development,
parts may be uplifted or depressed, giving rise to
certain characteristic features associated with reju-
venation. i.e. being young again.
A negative movement occurs when there is an
uplrft of land or a fall in sea-level. This will steepen
the slope so that active down-cutting is renewed. A
fall in sea-level leaves the flood plain at an increased
altitude above the sea-level. The river with its
renewed vigour cuts into the former flood plain,
leaving behind terraces on both sides of the river.
There is also a break in the graded profile of the
river, often marked by a series of rapids. This point
where the old and rejuvenated profile meet is called
the knick point or rejuvenated head (Fig. 5.I7).
If rejuvenation occurs in the upper course, the
river valleys are deepened and steep-sided gorges
are formed. In the middle and lower course vertical
Fig. 5.17 River terraces and knick point due to rejuvenation.
The rejuvenated river cuts down into previously deposited
sediments to form a new valley leaving terraces at either
side. At the head of refuvenation the river falls to its new
valley at a knick point.
corrasion replaces lateral corraslon and the exrsting
meanders are vertically eroded by the rejuvenated
stream. A distinct new inner trench is cut in the old
valley, and the river develops a deep valley with
entrenched or incised meanders. The best developed
incised meanders are those of the River Colarado,
U.S.A., where the uplift of 2 100 metres (7,000 feet)
in the Tertiary period renewed down-cutting to a fan-
tastic depth. In some parts of the Grand Canyon,
the depth is almost li km (a mile). It is 16 km (10
miles) wide at the top and 480 km (300 miles) long.
Other examples are the River Moselle in Germany,
the River Wear at Ddrham, England, and the Wye
Valley, Monmouthshire.
A positive movement occurs when there is a
depression of land or a rise in sea-level. This will sub-
merge the lands along the coast, 'drown' the valleys
and weaken the erosive power of the river. The flow
is checked and large quantities of sediment will be
dropped. The lower course of the river may be partly
in the sea and features of deposition are shifted
upwards to the middle course. The upper course is
little affected when there is a rise in sea-level. In
many areas where the sea has risen, this was prob-
ably caused by the release of water locked up in the
ice masses during the Quaternary Ice Ages.
old flood plain
knick point
The Human Aspects of Rivers
In many countries, rivers form the chief highways of
commerce and transport. The Chang Jiang (Yangtze
Kiang) is navigable up to 1. 600 km (1,000 miles)
from its mouth. The Amazon, the world's greatest
river, is navigable 3 700 km (2,300 miles) upstream
to the foot of the Andes, though it is less extensively
used. Even the Nile with its cataracts is navigable
for its first 1 545 km (960 miles) up to the First Cat-
aract at Aswan. Other major rivers such as the Mis-
sissippi, St. Lawrence, Rhine, Danube, Zaire,
Murray, Darling, Mekong and Irrawaddy all serve
as important waterways for their respective coun-
tries. Some of them are useful for transporting logs
to the sawmills, others are used to export bulky
goods and import foodstuffs and raw materials.
But all rivers undertake three closely interrelated
activities: erosion, transportation and deposition.
Their work has therefore both advantages and dis-
advantages from a human point of view. Rapids and
waterfalls interrupt the navigability of a river. By
depositing large quantities of sediments in the lower
knick point
))

course, the river silts up ports preventing large
steamers from anchoring close to the shores. Deltas
are thus less satisfactory sites than estuaries for the
siting of large ports, though this can be overcome by
the construction of artificial harbours or by dredging
which is expensive and, in some instances impractic-
able. Some rivers change their courses from time to
time, others are made difficult for navigation by
their seasonal variations in the amount of water dis-
charged, and others may suffer from ill-drained
marshes and stagnant waters, leading to ill health
and waterborne diseases. Many rivers flood, burst-
ing levees and causing untold damage to crops. The
floods may add a layer of fertile silt to the flood
plain, but excessive flooding as in the Orinoco may
discourage people from cultivating crops at all.
On the other hand, the advantages of rivers often
outweigh the destruction that they cause. In the
upper course, rivers with steep gorges and water-
falls, provide natural sites for the generation of
hydro-electric power, leading to the establishment of
metallurgical industries, engineering and aluminidm
smelting, which can be profitably run on cheap,
abundant power. Dams constructed across rivers
hold back flood-water which if allowed to flow down-
stream unchecked may cause widespread disastrous
floods in the lower course, e.g. in the Indus and
Ganges plains. In regions of insufficient rainfall such
as Egypt and the Chao Phraya basin in Thailand
irrigation canals fed by the main stream enable many
crops to be successfully cultivated. The upper
streams develop river captures and the resultant
wind gaps may facilitate construction of upland
roads and railways. The river valleys provide a con-
venient means of land communication.
The flood plains of large rivers with their thick
mantles of fine silt are some of the richest agricul-
tural areas of the world. They may support very
dense populations and a chain of large cities may be
strung along their banks. Many deltas are equally
fertile, e.g. the Ganges Delta accounts for almost all
the jute grown for world consumption; the Nile
Delta produces superior quality cotton and several
crops of rice a year. The productive hinterlands are
able to support ports such as New Orleans for the
Mississippi basin, Rotterdam for the Rhineland and
Calcutta for the Indo-Gangetic Plain.
Freshwater fishing is important along many rivers
and lakes. The organic matter brought down by the
river waters provides valuable food for fish and for
spawning purposes. Rivers supply water for domes-
tic consumption, sewerage and industrial purposes.
In Lancashire, the soft water from the Millstone Grit
is used for washing, dyeing and bleaching textiles.
Rivers form the political boundaries between many
countries. The Mekong separates Laos from Thai-
land; and the Yalu forms a well-defined border
between North Korea and the eastern U.S.S.R.
Ouestions and Exercises
1. What are the characteristic features you would
expect to find in a river valley at the upper, mid-
dle and lower course? Illustrate some of the
more outstanding features with diagrams and
examples.
2. By reference to specific examples, describe the
major constructive and destructive processes at
work along the course of a river from its source
to its mouth.
3. With the aid of annotated diagrams, explain the
contrasting features of any three of the following
pairs of features of a river:
(a) dendritic and trellised drainage pattern;
(b) rapids and waterfalls;
(c) estuary and delta;
(d) tributaries and distributaries;
(e) river capture and river cliff.
Explain any three of the following statements
briefly:
(a) Lateral corrasion widens the V-shaped river
valley.
(b) Vertical corrasion is dominant in the upper
course of a river.
(c) The work of a river in the lower course is
mainly depositional.
(d) Ports are better sited on estuaries than on
deltas.
(e) The navigability of rivers are influenced by
many factors.
Either: Describe and explain with relevant
sketches the various types of river delta.
Or: Explain the ways in which river erosion
occurs.
Name two prominent features produced by river
4.
5.
6.

erosion and another two features by river dep-
osition. For each of the features state
(a) in which part of the river course it occurs;
(b) how it is formed;
(c) what are its characteristics?
Draw simple annotated diagrams to illustrate
each of the above features.
(a) What is meant by the 'load of a river'?
(b) In which part of the river is the 'load' heav-
iest?
(c) Explain how the 'load' is gathered, trans-
ported and deposited along the river.
(d) Distinguish between 'alluvium' and 'silt'
deposited by a river.
are outlined below: Select one which
is commonly found in the lower
course of a river.
A river capture
B distributaries
C interlocking spurs
D cataracts
5. Large deltas are nor likely to be
formed when
A the adjoining sea is deep
B strong currents run parallel to the
river mouth
C the coast is well sheltered
D the lower course of the river is on
low, level ground
7.
Sample Obiective O,uestions
1. Deposition of river-borne materials
occurs when the flow of the river is
interrupted in the following inst-
ances but zot
A when there is a change in gra-
dient
B where there is extensive flooding
C when it flows through a deeP
gorge
D when the river enters a large lake
lake
2. An examPle of a bird's foot delta
with fingering branches maY be
found at the
A River MississiPPi
B River Rhine
C River Nile
D River Ob
3. Waterfalls may be formed in the fol-
lowing ways except
A when a bar of resistant rock lies
transversely across a river valley
B when a river plunges down the
edge of a plateau
C when a river descends a hanging
valley
D when river capture occurs at the
head of a stream
4. Some of the features of river erosion

