Chapter 6 Landforms of Glaciation
The lce Age and Types of lce Masses
During the Pleistocene period or the Ice Ages, about
30 000 years ago, great continental ice sheets cov-
ered much of the temperate latitudes. It is estimated
that more than 31 million sq km (12 million square
miles) of the northern hemisphere were buried by
ice, half of which was in North America and the rest
in Europe, Greenland and the high mountains of
Eurasia (Fig. 6.1). The warmer climate that fol-
lowed caused the ice Sheets to retreat. Today only
two major ice caps are still present, in Greenland
and Antarctica. The former covers an area of
| 872 000 sq km (720,000 square miles) while the
latter is more than 13 million sq km (5 million square
miles). They are made up of compact sheets of ice,
hardened and crystallized to a depth of over a kil-
ometre. In Marie Byrd Land, Antarctica, the ice cap
was measured and found to be more than 4 200
metres (14,000 feet) thick. Under such a colossal
weight, the land sinks gradually.
From the central dome of the ice cap the ice
creeps out in all directions to escape as glaciers. The
peaks of the loftier mountains project above the sur-
face as nunataks. When the ice sheets reach right
down to the sea they often extend outwards into the
polar waters and float as ice shelves. They terminate
Fig. 6.1 The extent of continental ice sheets in the lce Ages
in precipitous cliffs. When they break into individual
blocks, these are called icebergs. While afloat in the
sea, icebergs assume a tabular or irregular shape and
only one-ninth of the mass is visible above the sur-
face. They diminish in size when approaching
warmer waters and are eventually melted, dropping
the rock debris that was frozen inside them on the
sea bed.
Apart from Greenland and Antarctica, glaciation
is still evident on the highlands of many parts of the
world, which lie above the snowline. This varies
from sea-level in the polar regions to 2 700 metres
(9,000 feet) in the Alps and 5 180 metres (17,000
feet) at the equator, as on Mt. Kilimanjaro
(Fig. 6.2). Permanent snowfields are sustained by
heavy winter snowfall and ineffective summer melt-
ing the day, but by nightfall it is refrozen. This pro-
cess is repeated until it forms a hard, granular
light and strong winds, any snow that falls is rapidly
accumulated. Part of the surface snow may melt dur-
ing the day, but by nightfall it is refrozen. This proc-
ess is repeated until it forms a hard, granular
substance known as ndvi (in French) or firn (in
German). Owing to gravitational forces, the n6vt of
the upland snowfield is drawn towards the valley
below. This is the beginning of the flow of the gla-
cier-'river of ice'. It normally assumes a tongue-
Maximum extent of the ice sheets

Fig.6.2 The lowering of snowline from the equator (e.g. Mt.
Kilimanjaro at 5 182 metres (17.000 feet)) to the poles
(Spitzbergen at sea-level )
shape, broadest at the source but becoming nar-
rower downhill. Though the glacier is not a liquid,
under the continual pressure from the accumulated
snow above, it moves. The rate of movement is
greatest in the middle where there is little obstruc-
tion. The sides and the bottom are held back by fric-
tion with the valley side spurs and the valley floor.
If a row of stakes is planted across a glacier in a
straight line, they will eventually take a curved shape
down the valley, showing that the glacier moves
faster at the centre than the sides (Fig.6.3). In the
Alps the average rate of flow is about one metre (3
feet) a day; in Greenland it may be more than 15
metres (50 feet), but in Antarctica, where there is
little heat to melt the ice, glaciers move only a few
millimetres a day! The Aletsch Glacier in the
Bernese Oberland of Switzerland is-16 metres (10
miles) long, affording some spectacular sights to
Alpine tourists. Though it is the longest glacier in
Fig. 6.3 The different rate of glacial movement. A glacier
moves faster in the centre than the sides.
m
9 i40
7 620
6 100
4 570
3 050
1 520
Europe, it is short compared with those of Alaska
and the Himalayas which measure more than five
times that length.
At the foot of mountain ranges, several glaciers
may converge to form an extensive ice-mass called
a piedmont glacier. The best known piedmont gla-
cier is the Malaspina Glacier of Alaska which is
104 km (65 miles) long and 40 km (25 miles) wide,
covering an area of more than 4 200 sq km (1,600
square miles). Combined glaciers of such dimensions
are now rare and in most continents only valley or
Alpine glaciers are seen.
Landforms of Highland Glaciation
Glaciation generally gives rise to erosional features
in the highlands and depositional features on the
lowlands, though these processes are not mutually
exclusive because a glacier plays a combined role of
erosion, transportation and deposition thottghout its
course. A glacier erodes its valley by two processes:
plucking and abrasion. By plucking, the glacier
freezes the joints and beds of the underlying rocks,
tears out individual blocks and drags them away. By
abrasion, the glacier scratches, scrapes, polishes and
scours the valley floor with the debris fuozen into it.
These fragments are powerful 'tools' of denudation.
Large angular fragments cut deep into the underly-
ing rocks so all glaciated floors bear evidence of
striation or scratching. The finer materials smooth
and polish the rock surfaces and produce finely
ground rock flour. The rate of erosion is determined
by several factors such as the velocity of flow, gra-
dient of the slope, the weight of the glacier, the tem-
perature of the ice and the geological structure of
the valley (Figs. 6.4a and b).
Mt. Everest
(HIMALAYAS}
8 848 m/29,028 fi
Mt. Kilimaniaro
(AFR ICA)
5 888 m/l9,319 ft
Mt. Matterhorn
Mt. Fujiyama (ALPS) 
Mt. Robson
(JAPAN) 
4 505 m/l4,780 ft 
(RocKlEs)
ttaii12j€srt A 
ss54mt12,s72ft [,:lo_l:L .-._.
.A' 
'\ 
N 
(GREENLAND}
3 383 m/l 1.100 f t

Rugged peaks of alpine landform
rounded glaciated
landform
M
Fig. 6.4(a) The rugged appearance of alpine landform
before continental glaciation
6.4 A gfaciaf landscape in Switzerland Swiss National
Tourist Office
Fig. 6.4(b) The rounded appearance of glaciated landform
after continental glaciation

rugged mountain wall
Fig. 6.5 Development of a corrie
The characteristic features of a glaciated highland
are as follows:
l. Corrie, cirque or cwm. The downslope move-
ment of a glacier from its snow-covered valley-head,
and the intensive shattering of the upland slopes,
tend to produce a depression where thefirn or nEvA
accumulates. The process of plucking operates on
the back-wall, steepening it and the movement of the
ice abrades the floor, deepening the depression into
a steep, horse-shoe-shaped basin called a cirque (in
French). It is also known as a corrie in Scotland and
a cwm in Wales (Fig. 6.5). There is a rocky ridge at
the exit of the corrie and, when the ice eventually
melts, water collects behind this barrier, to form a
corrie lake or tarn.
2. Ar6tes and pyramidal peaks. When two corries
cut back on opposite sides of a mountain, knife-
edged ridges are formed called ar6tes (a French
word). A well-known British example of an ardte is
Fig. 6,6 Cirque, ar€te and pyramidal peak
6.8 The Athabasca glacier of Colombia lcefield, Canada
showing crevasses in foreground Canadian Government
Travel Bureau
the Striding Edge on Helvellyn in Westmorland.
Where three or more cirques cut back together, their
ultimate recession will form an angular hom or
pyramidal peak. The Matterhorn of Switzerland is
a classic example (Fig. 6.6).
3. Bergschrund. At the head of a glacier, where it
begins to leave the snowfield of a corrie, a deep ver-
tical crack opens up called a bergschrund (in Ger-
man) or rimaye (in French). This happens in
summer when, although the ice continues to move
out of the corrie, there is no new snow to replace it.
In some cases, not one but several such cracks occur.
The bergschrund presents a major obstacle to climb-
ers. Further down where the glacier negotiates a
bend or a precipitous slope, more crevasses or cracks
are formed (Fig. 6.5).
4. U-shaped glaciat trough. The glacier on its down-
ward journey, fed by ice from several corries-like
tributaries that join a river, begins to wear away the
sides and floor of the valley down which it moves.
It scratches and grinds the bedrock, removing any
rock debris and surface soil. It tends to straighten
any protruding spurs on its course. T\e interlocking
spurs are thus blunted to form truncated spurs and
the floor of the valley is deepened (Fig. 6.7). A val-
tey which has been glaciated takes a characteristic
6l

Fig. 6.7 A glaciated upland
6.C A U-shaped valley in Switzerland. The valley sides are
steep butthe floor isflat. There is a ribbon lake in the valley
bottom. Swiss National Tourist Office
U-shape, with a wide, flat floor and very steep sides
(Plate 6.C). After the disappearance of the ice, the
overdeepened sections of these long, narrow gla-
cial troughs may be filled with water forming ribbon
lakes, such as Loch Ness and Lake Ullswater in Brit-
ain. They are sometimes referred to as trough lakes
or finger lakes.
5. Hanging valleys. The main valley is eroded much
more rapidly than the tributary valleys as it contains
a much larger glacier. After the ice has melted, a
tributary valley therefore 'hangs' above the main
valley so that its stream plunges down as a waterfall
(Fig. 6.7). Such tributary valleys are termed hanging
valleys and may form a natural head of water for
generating hydro-electric power.
6. Rock basins and rock steps. A glacier erodes and
excavates the bedrock in an irregular manner. The
unequal excavation gives rise to many rock basins
later filled by lakes in the valley trough. Where a
tributary valley joins a main valley, the additional
weight of ice in the main valley cuts deeper into the
valley floor at the point of convergence forming a
rock step. A series of such rock steps may also be
formed due to different degrees of resistance to gla-
cial erosion of the bedrocks.
7. Moraines. Moraines are made up of the pieces
of rock that are shattered by frost action, imbedded
in the glaciers and brought down the valley. Those
that fall on the sides of the glacier, mainly screes,
form lateral moraines. When two glaciers converge,
their inside lateral moraines unite to form a medial
moraine. The rock fragments which are dragged
along beneath the frozen ice are dropped when the
glacier melts and spread across the floor of the valley
as ground moraine. The glacier eventually melts on
reaching the foot of the valley, and the pile of trans-
Fig. 6.8 The glacial moraines
*-n-o'ttt=w
snout melts

Fig. 6.9 A glacier ending at the sea
ported materials left behind at the snout is the ter-
minal moraine or end moraine (Fig. 6.8). The
deposition of the end moraines may be in several
succeeding waves, as the ice may melt back by stages
so that a series of recessional moraines are formed.
If the glacier flows right down to the sea it drops
its load of moraine in the sea. If sections break off
as icebergs, morainic material will only be dropped
when they melt (Fig. 6.9). Where the lower end of
the trough is drowned by the sea it forms a deep,
steep-sided inlet called a fiord, typical of the Nor-
wegian and south Chilean coasts (see Chapter 10).
Landforms of Glaciated Lowlands
Landforms of glaciated lowlands are mainly deposi-
tional in nature, brought about by both valley gla-
ciers and continental ice sheets. The former leave
behind the eroded materials in only restricted areas.
The imprint of ice sheets on the landscape is far
more widespread because they advanced through
large areas during the Ice Ages, scouring and remov-
ing any surface soil and rock debris on their way. As
a result, it has been estimated that almost a third of
the total land surface of Eirrope and North America
is littered with glacial and fluvio-glacial materials of
all descriptions-moraines, boulder clay, tills, drifts,
rock flour, gravel and sand. Many of them are
being re-eroded, resorted and redeposited elsewhere
by present-day rivers.
Most of the glaciated lowlands have depositional
features, but where rock masses project above the
level surface, they result in striking features of ero-
sion, such as the roche moutonn6e and crag and tail.
1. Roche Moutonn6e. This is a resistant residual
rock hummock. The surface is striated by ice move-
ment. Its upstream side is smoothened by abrasion
and its downstream side is roughened by plucking,
and is much steeper. The term 'roche moutonn6e'
is used to describe such a feature because it resem-
bles a sheepskin-wig once worn in France
Flg. 6.10 Roche moutonn6e
(Fig. 6.10). Roches moutonndes are found in both
highland and lowland glaciated regions.
2, Crag and tail. The crag is a mass of hard rock
with a precipitous slope on the upstream side, which
protects the softer leeward slope from being com-
pletely worn down by the on-coming ice. It therefore
has a gentle tail, strewn with the eroded rock debris.
The classic example isthe Castle Rock of Edinburgh,
Scotland. Edinburgh Castle is located on the crag
and the High Street on the tail (Fig. 6.11).
The remaining glaciated lowland features are of
a depositional nature (Fig. 6.12). The following are
the typical ones.
3. Boulder clay or glacial till. This is an unsorted
glacial deposit comprising a range of eroded mate-
rials-boulders, angular stones, sticky clay and fine
rock flour. It is spread out in sheets, not mounds,
and forms gently undulating till or drift plains.The
landform is rather monotonous and featureless. The
Fig. 6.11 Crag and tail
Fig.6.'12 Glacial depositional features in the outwash plain
_> 
diroctaon of ice moventent
dilectron ol rce movement
ou twash

6.D A glacial erratic left on the limestone moors, West-
morf and, England Popperfoto
degree of fertility of such glacial plains depends very
much on the composition of the depositional mate-
rials. Some of the boulder clay plains such as East
Anglia and the northern Mid-West of U.S.A. form
rich arable lands.
4. Erratics. These are boulders of varying sizes that
were transported by ice. They came with the ddvanc-
ing glaciers or ice sheets but when the ice melted,
they were left 'stranded' in the regions of deposition
(Plate 6.D).They are called erratics because they are
composed of materials entirely different from those
of the region in which they were found. Such erratics
are thus most useful in tracing the source and direc-
tion of the ice movement. Sometimes the erratics
may be found perched in precarious positions just as
the ice dropped them and they are then termed
perched blocks. Examples of such blocks are com-
monly encountered in both lowland and highland
areas in Europe, e.g. Silurian grits are found perched
on the Carboniferous Limestone of the Pennines.
Their presence in large numbers is a hindrance to
farming.
5. Drumlins. These are swarms of oval, elongated
'wh4le-back' hummocks composed wholly of boulder
clay, with their elongation in the direction of the ice
flow, that is on the downstream side. They are low
hills varying from a few metres to 126 metres (400
feet) in height and may be a kilometre or two long.
They appear a little steeper at the onset side and
taper off at the leeward end. They are arranged
diagonally and so are commonly described as having
a 'basket of eggs topography'. Large numbers of
them are found in County Down in Northern lreland
and the glaciated plain around the Great Lakes in
North America, (Plate 6.E).
6. Eskers. These are long, narrow, sinuous ridges
composed of sand and gravel which mark the former
6.E A drumlin field in northern England J.K. St Joseph
sites of sub-glacial melt-water streams. They vary
from a few metres to 60 metres (200 feet) in height
and may be several kilometres long. In some parts
of Maine, U.S.A., the outstanding eskers form a
continuous ridge of 160 km (100 miles)! They are
very numerous in Scandinavia, e.g. the Punkaharju
Esker of Finland. As eskers are made up of highly
porous sand and gravel, water is rapidly drained off
from their crests and they may not support many
trees, though in Finland they often form tree-cov-
ered ridges between lakes.
7. Terminal moraines. These are made up of the
coarse debris deposited at the edge of the ice-sheet,
to form hummocky and hilly country such as the
Baltic Heights of the North European Plain
(Fig. 6.12).
E. Outwash plains. These are made up of fluvio-gla-
6.F Screes in the Lake District, England Poppertoto

cial deposits washed out from the terminal moraines
by the streams and channels of the stagnant ice mass.
The melt-waters sort and re-deposit the material in
a variety of'forms from the low hilly heathlands,
such as the Luneburg Heath of the North European
Plain, to undulating plains, where terraces, alluvial
fans and deltaic deposits of the melt-water streams
make up the landscape. Kames, small rounded hil-
locks of sand and gravel may cover part of the plain.
There the deposition takes the form of alternating
ridges and depressions, the latter may contain kettle
lakes and give rise to characteristic'knob and kettle'
topography (Fig. 6.12).
The Human Aspects of Glaciated
Landforms
Though the Ice Ages were at their height over
30 000 years ago, the effects of glaciation on both
landforms and human activities have profound influ-
ence in many parts of the world today. Their most
striking impact is felt in the temperate regions of
Europe and North America which were once under
continental ice sheets. Further south and on the high
mountains all over the world, slow-moving glaciers
are still shaping the landscape in the Alps, Andes,
Rockies and Himalayas. Glacial influences of Man's
economic activities are both favourable and unfa-
vourable, depending on the intensity of glaciation,
the relief of the region and whether the effects are
of an erosional or depositional nature.
In hilly regions such as the mountain slopes of
Scandinavia, ice sheets and glaciers have removed
most of the top soil, leaving them quite bare of veg-
etation. Soils that do exist are so thin that they are
incapable of supporting effective agriculture. Glacial
drifts in the valleys and benches or alps which were
not affected by glaciers have good pastures during
summer. Cattle are driven up to graze on the grass
and return to the valley bottom in winter. This form
of animal-migration type of farming is called trans-
humance. Extensive boulder clay plains such as
those of East Anglia and the Mid-West of U.S.A.
are some of the most fertile agricultural plains
known. The loess plains of Europe and central
U.S.A., with a high proportion of humus are good
farming land too. On the other hand, the sandy or
gravelly outwash plains, e.g. the heath-covered geest
of northern Germany, the marshy boulder clay
deposits of central Ireland, the barren ice-scoured
surfaces of the Canadian and Baltic Shields are infer-
tile. The presence of numerous erratics and perched
blocks in parts of Britain and in Alberta, Canada,
many of them of gigantic size obstruct farming and
the use of machines. Morainic deposits may dam, or
glaciers may hollow out, lakes which greatly incon-
venience large-scale farming or land development.
But when the lakes are eliminated, the old glacial
lake beds with their rich alluvium support heavy
cropping.
Large lakes formed by former glaciation, e.g. the
Great Lakes of North America, make excellent
waterways. They may also cut deep overflow chan-
nels while draining off, making natural routeways
across a mountainous terrain, e.g. the Hudson-
Mohawk Gap that links the interior with the Atlantic
seaboard of the U.S.A. On the other hand in regions
where drumlins are dominant, the drainage is either
poor or much confused.
Terminal and recessional moraines comprise
coarse materials of little use to Man but fluvio-glacial
deposits are not without their economic significance.
In the outwash plains, eskers and kames have been
excavated to provide sands and gravels for highway
and building construction. The purest sands are
extracted to make moulds for metal castings. The
lake basins of glaciated mountains provide natural
reservoirs. In countries like Scandinavia, Switzer-
land and Canada where there is little available coal,
streams and waterfalls that plunge down from hang-
ing valleys or other glaciated uplands are being har-
nessed to provide hydro-electric power. This has
helped to develop many of the chemical and metal-
lurgical industries. With the magnificent scenery pro-
vided by the glaciated- mountains e.g. the French,
Italian and Swiss Alps, large numbers of tourists are
attracted to them annually. Skiing, mountain climb-
ing and sight-seeing are all popular with Alpine tour-
ists.

Ouestions and Exercises
1. Choose any three of the following glacial fea-
tures: corrie, ardte, erratic, hanging valley, ket-
tle lake, nunatak.
For each of them:
(a) Describe its physical appearance.
(b) Account for its mode of formation.
(c) Locate and name an area where an example
could be seen.
2. (a) Distinguish between valley glaciers and con-
tinental ice sheets.
(b) 
Explain why glaciation in the uplands pro-
duced erosional features while that of the
lowlands produced mainly depositional fea-
tures.
3. The following lowland glacial features are all, in
fact, small ridges, but are quite different in their
process of formation:
(a) State which of them are of erosional or dep-
ositional nature.
(b) Pick out their distinctive differences in both
appearance and formation.
roche moutonn6e, drumlin, esker, crag
and tail, kames.
Sample Objective Ouestions
l. A glacier is 'a river of ice' which
moves downhill to the valley below.
Its rate of rnovement is greatest
A on both sides of the glacier
B where the surface is level
C where the slope is steepest
D at the snowfield on the top
2. Fig. 6.5 on page 61 shows a typical
bergschrund in a corrie. Its develop-
ment is due to
A frost action on glacial surfaces
B a glacier moving down the hill
slope
C heavy snowfall in winter
D rain-water freezing the snowfield
3. What relief feature is formed by the
planning and dragging action of a
elacier?
4. Briefly explain any three of the following:
(a) Glaciated valleys assume a characteristic U-
shape.
(b) The middle of a glacier moves faster than
the sides.
(c) In glaciated lowlands, eskers, kames and
other morainic deposits are extensively
quarried.
(d) Glacial soils vary greatly in their fertility.
(e) Erratics and perched blocks are the best
indicators of the source and direction of ice
movement.
5. With the aid of diagrams attempt to explain the
difference between any three of the following
pairs of terms connected with glaciation:
(a) valley glacier and piedmont glacier;
(b) bergschrund and crevasses;
(c) corrie lake and ribbon lake;
(d) interlocking spurs and truncated spurs;
(e) terminal moraine and .ecessional moraine.
A the nunatak
B the drumlin
C the ar€te
D the truncated spur
4. A well-glaciated area in temperate
latitudes has all but one of the fol-
lowing features.
A U-shaped valleys
B truncated, steep-sided spurs
C hanging valleys
D dry wadis
5. The diagrams below show the snow-
line of four mountains in the south-
ern hemisphere. Which one is lo-
cated furthest north?

