Chapter 4 Weathering, Mass Movement
and Groundwater
The earth's crust is constantly undergoing geological
changes caused by internal forces, which create new
relief features. Orogenesis build new mountain
ranges, uplift or depression of particular areas is
caused by folding or faulting, and volcanic disturb-
ances also modify the landscape. Meanwhile exter-
nal forces are working vigorously to wear away the
surface, and the interaction ofthese constructive and
destructive forces gives rise to the great diversity of
present-day landforms. The process of wearing away
the earth causes a general lowering and levelling out
of the surface. It is known as denudation and is car-
ried out in four phases.
1. Weathering: the gradual disintegration of
rocks by atmospheric or weather forces;
2. Erosion: the active wearing away of the earth's
surface by moving agents like running water, wind,
ice and waves;
3. Transportation: the removal of the eroded
debris to new positions;
4. Deposition: the dumping of the debris in cer-
tain parts of the earth, where it may accumulate to
form new rocks.
All four phases of the denudation process are tak-
ing place simultaneously in different parts of the
world at different rates, much depending on the
nature of the relief, the structure of the rocks, the
local climate and interference by Man.
This chapter describes the work of weathering and
the features it produces, while Chapters 5 to 10 deal
with erosion, transportation and deposition by
water, wind, ice and waves.
Weathering
The work of weathering in breaking up the rocks is
of two kinds, namely chemical, and physical or
mechanical weathering, but the processes involved
in each are closely interrelated.
CHEMICAL WEATHERING
Chemical weathering is the basic process by which
denudation proceeds. It is the extremely slow and
gradual decomposition of rocks due to exposure to
air and water. Air and water contain chemical ele-
ments, which though they may be in small quan-
tities, are sufficient to set up chemical reactions in
the surface layers of exposed rocks. Such reactions
may weaken or entirely dissolve certain constituents
of the rock, thus loosening the other crystals and
weakening the whole surface. For example, in
Malaysia, the surface of granite which has been
exposed to the weather is found to be pitted and
rough. This is because the granite is made of three
main minerals: quartz, felspar and mica. The felspar
is more quickly weathered than the quartz and thus
the felspar crystals are worn away. The quartz crys-
tals are eventually loosened in this way and form a
coarse sandy residue.
When the surface of a rock is weathered some of
the material which is loosened is removed by erosive
agents such as wind or running water thus exposing
a fresh surface to weathering, but much of the
weathered material or regolith (remains of the rock)
may stay in position forming the basis of soil. Rego-
lith is simply the mineral remains of decomposed
rocks, but soil contains organic materials, such as the
roots of plants; fallen leaves, small animals such as
worms, bacteria and so on. It is the organic content
of soil which makes it fertile and allows crops to be
grown.
When a soil cover exists, chemical weathering of
the underlying rocks does not cease; on the contrary
it is usually enhanced. This is because the soil
absorbs rain-water and keeps the underlying rocks
in contact with this moisture. The rain-water absorbs
organic acids from the soil and thus becomes a
stronger weathering agent than pure rain-water act-
ing on bare rock.
There are three major chemical weathering pro-
CESSES.
l. Solution. Many minerals are dissolved by
water, especially when, as with rain-water, it con-
tains enough carbon dioxide to make it a weak acid.
Solution is the most potent weathering process in
limestone regions because the rain-water attacks and
dissolves the calcium carbonate of which the rock is
chiefly formed. The dissolved calcium carbonate is

carried away by the water, joints and cracks in the
rock are quickly widened and whole systems of caves
and passages are worn out (see Chapter 8). Lime-
stone, however, is by no means the only rock to suf-
fer from solution. All rocks are subject to solution
to some extent, though the process is much slower
than with limestone. The rate at which solution takes
place is affected not only by the mineral composition
of the rock but also by its structure. Sedimentary
rocks often have pore-spaces between the grains in
which air and water can lodge and thus attack the
rock. The density of joints or cracks in the rock is
also crucial to the speed of weathering. The factor
is very clearly seen in Malaysia in the weathering of
granite. In tropical countries, where the heavy rain-
fall and warm climate both promote rapid chemical
reactions, weathering often proceeds very rapidly.
This produces the very deep regoliths or soils over-
lying the solid rocks. Often these regoliths contain
core-stones. These are pieces of solid rock which
have resisted weathering while all the surrounding
rock has been weathered. They are more resistant
because they have fewer joints or cracks to harbour
moisture and are thus more slowly weathered by
solution processes (Fig. a.1 and Plate 4.A).
Rates of weathering are also affected by climate.
Fig.4.1 Differential weathering in a rock such as granite
where unevenly spaced joints may give rise to core-stones
and certain blocks remain unweathered. In jointed rocks,
temperature change cracks up rectangular blocks.
Rock easily
weathered
where loints are
Rock still
unweathered
where ioints
are far apart
4.A A solid core-stone embedded in weathered material
which has been exposed in a road cutting near Tampin,
Negri Sembifan G.C. Morgan
Warm wet climates promote rapid chemical weath-
ering, while dry climates inhibit chemical weather-
ing. Dry climates, however, provide good conditions
for physical or mechanical weathering.
2. Oxidation. Oxidation is the reaction of oxygen
in air or water with minerals in the rock. For exam-
ple, most rocks contain a certain amount of iron,
which when it comes in contact with air is changed
to iron oxide, familiar brownish crust or rust. Iron
oxide crumbles easily and is far more easily eroded
than the original iron. It is thus removed, loosening
the overall structure of the rocks and weakening
them.
3. Decomposition by organic acids. Within the
soil which covers most rocks are bacteria which
thrive on decaying plant or animal material. These
bacteria produce acids which, when dissolved in
water, help to speed up the weathering of the under-
lying rocks. In some cases, micro-organisms and
plants like mosses or lichens can live on bare rock,
so long as the surface is damp. These absorb chem-
ical elements from the rocks as food and also pro-
duce organic acids. They are thus agents of both
chemical and mechanical weathering.
PHYSICAL OR MECHANICAL WEATHERING
Mechanical weathering is the physical disintegration
of a rock by the actual prising apart of separate par-
ticles. This can happen even with completely fresh
rock but the processes of physical weathering are
able to work much more easily when the surface of
pattern of joints
JI

the rock has already been weakened by the action of
chemical weathering. Mechanical weathering takes
place in several ways.
l. Repeated temperature changes. In deserts,
rocks are exposed to the blazing sun during the day
and are intensely heated. The outer layers expand
much faster than the cooler interior of the rocks and
tend to pull away from the rest. At nightfall the tem-
perature drops rapidly and the outer layers contract
more rapidly than the interior, setting up internal
stresses. Such stresses, repeated every day for
months and years, cause the rocks to crack and split.
Well-bedded and jointed rocks tend to split along
the joints or cracks, breaking up into rectangular
blocks. Shales and slates may split up into platy frag-
ments because of their platy structure. In crystalline
rocks such as granite, the crystals of the various min-
erals (quartz, mica, felspar) will expand and contract
at different rates, enhancing the stresses and accel-
erating the disintegration of the rocks. Fragments
broken from large rock outcrops fall by gravity to
the foot of the slope. They may form screes or may
form a litter of angular chips and small boulders on
the flatter ground.
Stresses and pressures will naturally be greatest
near the surface and where there are sharp angles
in the rocks. Rectangular blocks are thus gradually
rounded by the splitting away of sharp corners.
When the surface layers of rounded boulders grad-
ually split off, the process is called onion peeling,
because the various layers look like the layers of an
onion, peeled off one after another. The technical
term for this process is exfoliation (Plate 4.B).
2. Repeated wetting and drying. Exfoliation is
not confined to desert areas. Similar stresses may be
set up in rocks by repeated wetting and drying of the
surface layers. This takes place especially in tropical
regions, like Malaysia, where short downpours sat-
Fig.4.2 Frost action as an agent of mechanical weathering
4.8 When core-stones are exposed to tropical weather con-
ditions they are subject to repeated wetting and drying which
cause the outer layers to peel off. This sandstone boulder
shows severaf fayers have split off in some areas. G.C. Mor-
gan
urate the rocks and then the hot sun quickly dries
them again. Repeated wetting and drying also occurs
at the coast, where rocks may be rapidly dried by
sun and wind between tides. When rocks are wetted
the outer layers absorb a certain amount of moisture
and expand. When they dry this moisture evaporates
and they quickly shrink. When this happens repeat-
edly the outer layers split off. It should also be
stressed that the wetting and drying of the rocks in
deserts is probably just as important as temperature
changes in mechanical weathering. The rocks dry
very quickly indeed after being wetted by brief de-
sert rainstorms.
3. Frost action. In temperate latitudes frost is a
Water collects in rock crevices
Water freezes and
expands in volume
prising rocks apart

Small plants
Large tree
Roots force their way into
joints and bedding planes
?
Bedding plane
5i{')?Ri'i ..3;-13.-3
Roots Penetrate joints and
force rocks aPart
potent rock breaker. All rocks contain cracks and
joints, or pore spaces, and after a shower, water or
snow collects in such places. When the temperature
drops at night or during the winter, this water
freezes. When water freezes, it expands by one-tenth
its volume and exerts a bursting pressure of almost
140 kg per square cm (2,000 lb. to the square inch).
Repeated freezing of this kind will deepen and
widen the original cracks and crevices and break the
rock into angular fragments (Fig. 4.4. On mountain
peaks this process creates sharp pinnacles and angu-
lar outlines. Such peaks are described as frost-shat-
tered peaks. Angular fragments of rock are prised
from mountain-sides or cliff faces and fall to the foot
of the slope where they accumulate to form screes.
4. Biotic factors. Small fragments of rock loos-
ened by either chemical or mechanical weathering
lodge in cracks and crevices in the rock and plants
may sprout in such crevices. As they grow, their roots
penetrate the rocks below, usually along joints and
other lines of weakness, prising them apart. You
have often come across large trees growing near
roads or the courtyards of houses that finally prise
open the concrete or paving stones above their
breaking up the surface
Fig. 4.3 Plant roots as agents of mechanical weathering
roots. The process is just the same on a smaller scale
in a natural setting (Fig. a.3).
Men, in the course of mining, road construction
and farming, also contribute to mechanical weath-
ering by excavating the rocks and rendering them
more vulnerable to the asents of denudation.
Mass Movement
Mass movement is the movement of weathered
materials down a slope due to gravitational forces.
The movement may be gradual or sudden, depend-
ing on the gradient of the slope, the weight of the
weathered debris and whether there is any lubricat-
ing moisture supplied by rain-water. Several kinds
of mass movement are distinguished.
SOIL CREEP
This is a slow, gradual but more or less continuous
movement of soil down hill slopes. The movement
is not very noticeable, especially when the slope is
fairly gentle or when the soil is well-covered with
grass or other vegetation. Soil creep is most common
in damp soils where the water acts as a lubricant so

Fig. 4.4 Evidences of soil creep
that individual soil particles move over each other
and over the underlying rock. It is also found where
continuous trampling by animals grazing on the
slopes sets up vibrations which loosen the soil and
cause it to move. Though the movement is slow and
cannot readily be seen in action, the gradual move-
ment tilts trees, fences, posts and so on which are
rooted in the soil. The soil is also seen to accumulate
at the foot of the slope or behind obstacles such as
walls, which may eventually be burst by the weight
of soil above (Fig. 4.4).
SOIL FLOW (SOLIFLUCTION)
When the soil is completely saturated with water the
individual particles are almost suspended in the
water and move easily over one another and over
the underlying rock. The soil acts like a liquid and a
soil-flow or mud-flow occurs. In arid regions a mantle
of weathered debris may become saturated with
rain-water after a storm and flow downslope as a
semi-liquid mass. In temperate and tundra regions
soil flows occur when the surface layers of frozen
ground thaw in spring. Soil and rock debris, lubri-
cated by the melt-water, flow easily over the under-
lying frozen subsoil. In areas of peat soils, the peat
absorbs much moisture. However if saturation point
is reached the peaty soil may flow downslope. In Ire-
land such flows are known as 'bog-bursts'.
L.ANDSLIDES (SLUMPING OR SLIDING)
These are very rapid kinds of movement and occur
when a large mass of soil or rock falls suddenly.
Landslides usually occur on steep slopes such as in
4.C A landslide after flood has damaged the road Jabatan
Penerangan Malaysia
mountainous areas. on cliffs or where Man has arti-
ficially steepened slopes, for example, in road or rail
cuttings (Plate 4.C). Landslides may be caused
because a steep slope is undercut by a river or the
sea so that it falls by gravity. Earthquakes or volcanic
disturbances may loosen rocks and start off a land-
slide. Man-made steepening both undercuts the
slope and sets up vibrations which may loosen rocks
or soil. But often landslides are caused by the lubri-
cating aclion of rain-water. Water may collect in
joints or bedding planes in rocks so that one layer
slides over another, especially in areas of tilted
strata. Slumping is particularly common where
permeable debris or rock layers overlie impermeable
strata such as clay. Water sinking through the
permeable material is halted by the clay. The damp
clay provides a smooth slippery surface over which
the upper layers easily slide (Fig. 4.5).
Water may collect at the base of the regolith
because it sinks readily into the weathered material
but more slowly into the solid rock beneath. The
water may allow the regolith to slide away from the
underlying rock.
Man often enhances the possibility of landslides by
clearing natural vegetation for agriculture or hous-
ing. Removal of the plant cover allows more water
to penetrate the soil and rocks. In areas such as the
Cameron Highlands, where steep slopes have been
cleared, there is much evidence of minor slumps and
slides, the old scars showing up clearly in the tea
gardens. Extensive landslides, whether natural or
man-induced, can have disastrous consequences,

Fig. 4.5 Landslide
burying villages, railway lines or people. Spectacular
landslides have taken place in many parts of the
world, including South Wales, British Columbia,
Hong Kong and the Cameron Highlands where the
village of Ringlet was partially buried in 1961 and
several houses were ruined.
Groundwater
The whole process of the circulation of water
between the land, sea and atmosphere is known as
the hydrological cycle. The movement of the water
in the atmosphere and its effect on climate are dealt
with in Chapters 13 and 14. The seas and oceans are
discussed in Chapter 12. The effect of water on the
land as an agent of weathering, erosion, transport
and deposition is dealt with in this and the following
chapters, especially Chapter 5.
When rain falls on the earth it is distributed in
various ways. Some is immediately evaporated and
thus returns to the atmosphere as water vapour.
Some is absorbed by plants and only gradually
returned to the atmosphere by transpiration from
the leaves of plants. Much of it flows directly off
slopes to join streams and rivers, eventually reaching
4.D An effective way of preventing landslide by building a
concrete waf f-Taiwan Goh Cheng Leong
the seas and oceans. This is known oS rurt:off. A con-
siderable proportion of the water received from rain
or snow, however, percolates downwards into the
soil and rocks, filling up joints and pore-spaces and
forming what is known as groundwater. Ground-
water plays an important part in weathering and
mass movement and is also important as a means of
natural water storage. It re-enters the hydrological
cycle by way of springs.
The amount of water available to form ground-
water depends to some extent on climate. In dry cli-
mates much precipitation may be quickly evaporated
into the dry atmosphere and little moisture may per-
colate into the ground. In very humid conditions,
where the surface of the ground may already be
moist, much water may be moved as run-off. In
moderately humid areas water both runs off and
sinks into the ground. The proportion of the rainfall
absorbed as groundwater may depend on the season
of the year.
More important, however, is the nature of the
rocks and how easily they absorb and retain water.

POROUS ROCK
(e.9. limestone)
Joints and faults
PERMEABLE OR
PERVIOUS ROCK
(e.9. granite)
4.E A severe flood in Kuala Kangsar (Malaysia) in 1967-the
main street of the town was under 4-6 metres (15-20 feet)
of water. Jabatan Penerangan Malaysia
Various rocks and soils differ greatly in their poros-
ity and permeability; the amount of groundwater
present and the depth at which it lies are governed
by these characteristics. Porous rocks are those, like
sandstone, which have many pore-spaces between
the grains. Water is easily absorbed by such rocks
and may be stored in the pore-spaces. Permeable or
pervious rocks are those which allow water to pass
through them easily (Fig. 4.6). Thus most porous
rocks are also permeable. However some rocks are
porous but impermeable. Clay, for example, is
highly porous since it is made up of innumerable
very fine particles with pore-spaces between them.
It thus absorbs a great deal of water. However, the
pore-spaces are so small that the water does not
move easily through the rock, which is thus
impermeable. On the other hand, granite which is
a crystalline rock and consequently non-porous is
often pervious. Its individual crystals absorb little or
Fig.4.7 Groundwater table and its relationship to the cur-
vature of the land
Fig. 4.6 Porosity and permeability of rocks
no water but the rock may have numerous joints or
cracks through which the water can pass, rendering
it pervious or permeable. Some granites are, how-
ever, far more pervious than others.
The Water-Table
Water which seeps through the ground moves down-
ward under the force of gravity until it reaches an
impermeable layer of rock through which it cannot
pass. If there is no ready outlet for the groundwater
in the form of a spring, the water accumulates above
the impermeable layer and saturates the rock. The
permeable rock in which the water is stored is known
as the aquifer (Fig. a.7). The surface of the satu-
rated area is called the water-table. The depth of the
water-table varies greatly according to relief and to
the type of rocks. The water-table is far below the
surface of hilltops but is close to the surface in val-
leys and flat low-lying areas where it may cause
lrnpermeable strata

waterlogging and swampy conditions. The depth of
the water-table also varies greatly with the seasons.
When plenty of rain is available to augment ground-
water supplies the water-table may rise, but in dry
periods, no new supplies are available, and the
water-table is lowered as groundwater is lost through
seepages and springs (Fig. 4.7).
Springs and Wells
SPRINGS
The groundwater stored in the rock is released on
to the surface at points where the water-table
reaches the surface. A spring is simply an outlet for
such water. The water may seep gradually out of the
rock or may gush opt as a fountain. Springs are of
Fig. 4.8(b) Spring emerges from rocks with joints
Fig. 4.8(a) Spring seeps from edge of pervious rock lying
above an inclined impervious stratum
Fig. 4.8(c) A dyke spring
--l-I3i-ll)
Li til*:
Rock with ioints or fisiures
Fig. 4.8(d) Scarp-foot spring and dip-slope spring
Dipsfope ,Orr^nOffi
Fig.4.8(e) A vauclusian spring in a karst region

several kinds due to the nature of the rocks and the
position of the water-table. The main types are
described below.
L. In areas of. tilted strata, where permeable and
impermeable rocks alternate, water emerges.at the
base of the permeable layers (Fig 4.8a).
2. In well-jointed roclcs water may percolate
downwards until it reaches a joint which emerges at
the surface. The water.may come to the surface
through the joint (Fig. a.8b).
3. Where a dyke or sill of impermeable rock is
intruded through permeable rocks, it causes the
water-table to reach the surface and the water issues
as a spring (Fig. a.8c).
4. In limestone or chalk escarpments, where the
permeable rock lies between impermeable strata,
water issues at the foot of the scarp as a scarp-foot
spring, or near the foot of the dip-slope as a dip-
slope spring, as illustrated in Fig. 4.8d.
5. In karst regions rivers often disappear under-
ground. They then flow through passages worn in
the rock by solution, and may re-emerge when lime-
stone gives place to some impermeable rock. This
kind of spring is sometimes called a vauclrnian
spring but is better referred to as a resurgence
(Fig. 4.8e; see also Chapter 8).
Some other types of spring, e.g. hot springs, min-
eral springs and geysers are described in Chapter 3.
WELLS
Springs are the natural emergence points of ground-
water, but Man can make use of stored water below
ground by sinking rvells. A hole is bored through the
earth until the water-table is reached. The well must
Fig. 4.10 Formation of an artesian basin where a pervious
layer (aquifer) is between two strata of impervious rocks,
Fig. 4.9 Depth of wells and water-table mark
be sunk to the depth of the permanent water-table
Gig. a.9) if a constant supply of water is to be
obtained. If the well is only sunk to the wet-season
depth of the water-table, water will be unobtainable
when the level drops in the dry season. When a well
is bored, the water usually has to be raised by hand
or by mechanical pumping. Wells are particularly
important in arid areas where there is little surface
water but where the underlying rocks contain
groundwater.
A particularly important type of well is the arte-
sian well, which owing to the nature of its formation
is quite distinctive. Where rock layers haye been
down-folded into a basin shape, permea\le strata
such as chalk or limestone may be sarldwiched
between impermeable layers, such as ckiy. The
permeable rocks may only come to the surface at the
during wet 
_Z_ -'r"-'-
Sason olfv t1>< 
wer water
y'!'g':I _3gtil
----'a---\------ri
- 
l--
' 
Saturated rock 
r 
\
ili
nbinfaltlsoats
iqh*" 
I
b----- 
- 
-

edges of the basin, but water falling on them will
gradually seep downwards by the force of gravity
until it reaches the lowest part of the basin
(Fig. a.10). The impermeable layer below prevents
the water from passing downwards while the
impermeable layer on top prevents any possibility of
the water escaping upwards. The aquifer is thus sat-
urated to the brim of the basin.
The water is thus trapped in the aquifer under
great pressure and when a well is bored, the pressure
of water downwards from all around the basin is suf-
ficient to force the water up the bore-hole so that it
gushes on to the surface like a fountain. After a time
the pressure decreases and it is necessary to pdmp
up the water.
The depth of artesian wells varies from place to
place, from a few metres to thousands of metres.
The water may be used to supply the needs of an
entire village as in the Great Plains of the U.S.A.
or for sheep farming as in Queensland and other
parts of Australia. Fig. 4.11 shows the distribution
of artesian basins in Australia. But the water is
sometimes unsuitable for agricultural or irrigation
purposes as it may be hot or contain an excessive
amount of mineral salts.
Artesian wells are most valuable to Man when
they can be used in desert areas, e.g. in parts of the
Sahara and in Australia. The aquifers receive water
9 r- 
gqo
O mll68 600
Fig.4.11 The distribution of artesian basins in Australia
in areas of higher rainfall, but the water accumulates
in basins underlying arid regions.
All wells bored by Man tend to deplete ground-
water resources because the water is extracted faster
than under natural conditions and also much faster
than it can be replenished by rainfall. In many areas
groundwater supplies have been greatly reduced or
even exhausted by Man as a result of carelessness
and over-exploitation.
Ouestions and Exercises
1. (a) What do you understand by the term
'weathering'?
(b) Name four natural forces that play a role
in weathering.
(c) Differentiate mechanical weathering from
chemical weathering and give examples of
each.
2. (a) Describe how gravitational forces and rain-
water assist in the mass movement of
weathered materials on hill slopes.
(b) Distinguish soil creep from landslides, and
locate places where such occurrences have'
taken place.
3. (a) What is meant by the following:
i. hydrological cycle;
ii. water-table;
iii. acquifer.
(b) For any two of the above, discuss their
relationship with groundwater.
While the earth's crust is undergoing construc-
tive changeq to create new relief, external
forces of nature are working vigorously to level
this down.' Discuss.
Elaborate on any three of. the following:
(a) Exfoliation is the result of temperature
changes in deserts.
(b) Screes accumulate at the foot of steep
mountains in temperate lands.
(c) There are many ways in which springs can
be formed.
(d) Artesian wells have a distinct formation.
(a) In what ways are chemical weathering dif-
ferent from mechanical weathering?
(b) Describe any three major processes of
chemical weathering.
(c) In what type of physical landform is chem-
ical weathering by solution most domi-
nant?
4.
5.
6.

(d) Name a few well-known physical features 9.
caused by solution in chemical weathering.
7. (a) Why is mechanical weathering also known
as physical weathering?
(b) State four ways by which mechanical
weathering takes place.
(c) In what climatic regions is mechanical
weathering by frost action most potent? 
10.
8. With reference to examples, carefully distin-
guish between:
(a) weathering and erosion;
(b) porous rocks and pervious rocks;
(c) a spring and a well;
(d) screes and pebbles.
Describe and explain the manner in which a
land surface may be changed by:
i. rain;
ii. frost:
iii. wind.
Illustrate your answer with annotated diagrams
and specific examples.
(a) Explain what happens to precipitation
when it falls on the land surface.
(b) What factors determine the amount of
water entering the ground in a particular
place?
(c) Why is the 'underground scenery' better
developed in karst regions?
Sample Objective Ouestions
1. Mechanical weathering takes place
through the following processes er-
cept
A repeated temperature changes in
rocks
B rain-water falling on limestone
pavements
C frost action in the Swiss Alps
D repeated wetting and drying in
tropical lands
2. In order to get a constant supply of
water, wells have to be sunk to
reach
A the wet season water-table
B the dry season water-table
C the permanent water-table
D the impervious strata
3. Study Plate 4.D on page 41 which
shows one effective way of prevent-
ing landslides in Taiwan. What is the
greatest single tactor that has
caused the soil to move down the
slope?
A gravitational force
B strong winds
C thunderstorms
D the weight of the house on the
top
4. Springs occur in the following areas
except
A where permeable and imperme-
able rocks alternate in areas of
tilted strata
B in limestone and chalk escarp-
ments
C along fiorded coasts where gla-
ciers terminate
D where a dyke or sill of imperme-
able rock intrudes throueh
permeable rocks
5. Chemical weathering is most potent
A in humid tropical regions
B within the Arctic Circle
C in arid deserts
D where winds are dust laden

