Chapter 2 The Earth's Crust
The Structure of the Earth
In order to understand the geography of the external
landforms of the Earth, it is essential that we have
some idea of what lies within the Earth's crust. It is
not possible to know exactly how the Earth was
formed about 4 500 million years ago, but from the
evidence of volcanic eruptions, earthquake waves,
deep-mine operations and crustal borings the follow-
ing facts are quite clear.
<--,--atmosphere
/'OCeanS
' 
(hydrosphere)
Fig. 2.1 A section showing the structure and composition
of the Earth
The Earth is made up of several concentric layers
(Fig. 2.1). The outer layer is the Earth's crust-the
lithosphere-which comprises two distinct parts. The
upper part consists of granitic rocks and forms the
continents. Its main mineral constituents are silica
and a/umina so it is collectively referred to as the
sial.lt has an average density of 2.7. The lower part
is a continuous zone of denser basaltic rocks forming
the ocean floors, comprising mainly silica, iron and
zagnesium. It is therefore called sima and has an
average density of 3.0. The sial and sima together
form the Earth's crust which varies in thickness from
only 5-6 km (3-4 miles) beneath the oceans to as
much as 48 km (30 miles) under some parts of the
continents. Since the sial is lighter than the sima, the
continents can be said to be 'floating' on a sea of
denser sima. This is illustrated inFig.2.2.
Immediately beneath the crust or lithosphere is
the mantle (or mesosphere) about 2 900 km (1,800
Fis.2.2 A section ,r";;; ;;*" 
continent (srAL) roats
on the denser SIMA
miles) thick, composed mainly of very dense rocks
rich in olivine. The interior layer is the core (or bar-
ysphere) 3 476 km (2,1ffi miles) in radius, and is
made up mainly of iron (Fe) with some njckel and
is called nift.The temperature here is estimated to
be as high as1 927 "C (3,500 .F), and the core is sub_
ject to extremely high pressure. Under such condi-
tions, the core could be expected to be in a liquid
state. But recent studies through earthquake waves
have suggested that the innermost part of the core
is probably a crystalline or solid mass.
Parts of the Earth's crust are immersed bv oceans
and seas. These form the hydrosphere. Extending
skywards for over 24 km (15 miles), the earth is en-
veloped.
The Glassification of Rocks
The Earth's crust is made up of various types of
rock, differing from one another in texture, struc-
ture, colour, permeability, mode of occurrence and
degree of resistance to denudation. A knowledge of
these rocks is of paramount importance to geolo-
gists, who study the composition and physical history
of the earth, but the geographer, too, needs a basic
knowledge of the most common rocks and their
relationship with landforms. Rocks also form the
basis for soil, and determine to some extent the type
of natural vegetation and land use, so we must have
a fair acquaintance with the rocks around us.
Generally speaking, all rocks may be classified
into three major groups-lgneous, sedimentary and
metamorphic, according, to their origin and appear-
ance.
rth s crust
( lithosphere)
l7

rcNEous RocKs 
those of Antrim in Northern lreland, the Deccan
Igneous rocks are formed by the cooling and soli- Plateau in Indla and the Columbia-Snake Plateau in
dification of molten rock (magma) from beneath the the U.S.A. Some kinds of basalt solidify in a very
Earth's crust. They are normally crystalline in struc- peculiar manner to form long polygonal columns
ture. They do not occur in strata (layers) nor do they (Plate 2.A). A well-known example is the columnar
contain fossils. Igneous rocks may be subdivided on basalt of the Giant's Causeway in Antrim. Some of
the basis of mineral composition. When they contain the molten lava may push its way to the surface
a high proportion of silica they are said to be acid. through clefts and passages, solidifying as vertical
Acid igneous rocks, such as granite, are less dense dykes or horizontal sills. Their origin and occurr-
and are lighter in colour than basic rocks. These con- ence will be discussed in greater detail in Chapter 3.
tain a greater proportion of basic oxides, e.g. of 
Most igneous rocks are extremely hard and resist-
iron, aluminium or magnesium, and are thus denser ant. For this reason, they are quarried for road-mak-
and darker in colour. 
ing and polished as monuments and grave-stones.
In terms of origin there are two main classes of.
igneous rocks.
1. Plutonic rocks. These are rocks formed at some
depth in the earth's crust. They have cooled and soli-
dified slowly so that large, easily-recognized crystals
have been able to form. These intrusive rocks. such
as granite, diorite and gabbro, are exposed to the
surface by the processes of denudation and erosion.
2. Volcanic rocks. These are molten rocks poured
out of volcanoes as lavas. They solidifi rapidly on the
Earth's surface and the crystals are small.
Basalt is a common volcanic or extrusive rock and
forms lava flows, lava sheets and lava plateaux, e.g.
2.A Basalt columns in the Giant's Causeway, Northern lre-
land, U.K. Goh Cheng Leong
SEDIMENTARY ROCKS
Sedimentary rocks are formed from sediments accu-
mulated over long periods, usually under water.
They are distinguished from the other rock types by
their characteristic layer formation and are ter-
med stratified rocks (Plate 2.B). The strata may
vary in thickness from a few centimetres to many
metres. The rocks may be coarse or fine-grained,
soft or hard. The materials that form sedimentary
rocks may be brought by streams, glaciers, winds or
even animals. They are non-crystalline and often
contain fossils of animals, plants and other micro-
organisms. Sedimentary rocks are thus the most var-
ied in their formation of all rocks. Sedimentary rocks
are classified according to their age and different
kinds of rocks formed during the same period are
grouped together. It is more useful to know the
characteristics of the various kinds of rock.
Sedimentary rocks may be classified under three
2.8 Minor faulting in sedimentary rocks of the Kenny Hill
Series. Two small faults have distorted the strata. G,C, Mor-
gan
l8

2.C This beach of limestone on the lsle of Man had its layers
bent by igneous intrusions. In the foreground is the igneous
rock with its totally different surface. Popperfoto
major categories in accordance with their origin and
composition.
1. Mechanically formed sedimentary rocks. These
rocks have been formed from the accumulation of
materials derived from other rocks which have been
cemented together. Sandstones are probably the
most familiar sedimentary rocks. They are made
from sand grains, often quartz fragments derived
from granites. Their texture, composition and colour
vary tremendously. Many types of sandstone have
been quarried for building purposes or for making
grindstones. A coarser type of sandstone is known
as grit. When larger pebbles are firmly cemented to
form a rock it is called conglomerate when the peb-
bles are rounded, or breccia when the fragments are
angular. The finer sedimentary materials form clay,
widely used for brick-making, shale or mudstone.
Sand and gravel may occur in uncemented form.
2. Organically formed sedimentary rocks. These
rocks are formed from the remains of living orga-
nisms such as corals or shellfish, whose fleshy parts
have been decomposed, leaving behind the hard
shells. The most common rocks formed in this way
are of the calcareous type. They include limestones
and chalk.
The carbonaceous rocks are also organically
formed but from vegetative matter-swamps and for-
ests. The pressure of overlying sediments has com-
pressed the plant remains into compact masses of
carbon which eventually become peat, tignite or
coal, all of which bear great economic value.
3. Chemically formed sedimentary rocks. Such
rocks are precipitated chemically from solutions of
one kind or another. Rock salts are derived from
strata which once formed the beds of seas or lakes.
Gypsum or calcium sulphate is obtained from the
evaporation of salt lakes, such as the Dead Sea,
which have a very high salinity. In similar ways,
potash and nitrates may be formed.
METAMORPHIC ROCKS
All rocks whether igneous or sedimentary may
become metamorphic or changed rocks under great
heat and pressure. Their original character and
appearance may be greatly altered by such forces,
particularly during intense earth movements. In this
manner, clay may be metamorphosed into slate,
limestone into marble, sandstone into quartzite,
granite into gneiss, shale into schist and coal into
graphite.
The lnfluence of Rock Types on r
Landscape
The appearance and characteristic features of land-
forms are greatly influenced by the underlying rock

2.D An isolated limestone hill near Kuala Lumpur. Compare
this hill with the limestone features shown in Chapter 8.
Jabatan Penerangan
type. Softer rocks like clay and shale are worn down
much faster than harder rocks like granite.
Within Peninsular Malaysia the resistant granites
form the high ground of the Main Range and the
Eastern Highlands, where several peaks rise to over
600 metres (2,000 feet). The landscape is one of
smooth slopes and rounded hilltops. The highest
peak in Peninsular Malaysia, Gunung Tahan,
2 190 metres (7,L86 feet) is composed of even more
resistant quarzite. Shales, schists and sandstones,
being less resistant, form the much lower, rounded
hills. Recent river sediments form flat plains. The
limestones, resistant because of their permeability,
form prominent steep-sided hills such as those near
Ipoh and in Perlis (Plate 2.D).
Earth Movements and the Maior
Landforms
The face of the Earth is constantly being reshaped
by the agents of denudation-running water, rain,
frost, sun, wind, glaciers and waves' so that our pres-
ent landforms are very varied and diverse. But these
agents only modify the pattern of mountains, pla-
teaux and plains which have been modelled by
movements of the Earth's crust.
Fig. 2.3 Structural divisions of the Earth
di
9?
N
+
To
Young Alplne Folds
Hercynlan Folds
Caledonlsn Folds
Prs-Crmbrlan Anclont Shl€Jd.
Scal€ 1 : 215,OOO,OOO (1 Inch: 5 44O km/3,4OO mlles)
iiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiliiiiririiili

Since the dawn of geological time, no less than
nine orogenic or mountain building movements have
taken place, folding and fracturing the Earth's crust.
Some of them occurred in Pre-Cambrian times
between 600-3 500 million years ago. The three
more recent orggenics are the Caledonian, Hercy-
nian and Alpine. The Caledonian about 320 million
years ago raised the mountains of Scandinavia and
Scotland, and is represented in North America.
These ancient mountdins have been worn down and
no longer exhibit the striking forms that they must
once have had. In a later period, during the Her-
cynian earth movements about 240 million years
ago, were formed such ranges as the Ural Moun-
tains, the Pennines and Welsh Highlands in Britain,
the Harz Mountains in Germany, the Appalachians
in America as well as the high plateaux of Siberia
and China. These mountains have also been reduced
in size by the various sculpturing forces.
We are now living in an era very close to the last
of the major orogenic movements of the Earth, the
Alpine, about 30 million years ago. Young fold
mountain ranges were buckled up and overthrust on
a gigantic scale. Being the most recently formed,
these ranges, such as the Alps, Himalayas, Andes
and Rockies (shown in Fig. 2.3) are the loftiest and
the most imposing. Their peaks are sometimes sev-
eral kilometres high. But the time will come when
these lofty ranges will be lowered like those that
existed before them. From the eroded materials,
new rocks will be formed, later to be uplifted to form
the next generation of mountains.
Types of Mountain
Mountains make up a large proportion of the Earth's
surface. Based on their mode of formation, four
main types of mountain can be distinguished.
Fig.2.4lal The horizontal strata of the Earth's crust before
folding
Fig. 2.4(b) Compression shortens the crust forming fold
mountains
2.E A syncfine in the Meuse Yalley Poppertoto
1. Fold mountains. These mountains are by far the
most widespread and also the most important. They
are caused by large-scale earth movements, when
stresses are set up in the Earth's crust. Such stresses
may be due to the increased load of the overlying
rocks, flow movements in the mantle, magmatic
intrusions into the crust, or the expansion or con-
traction of some part of the Earth. When such
stresses are initiated, the rocks are subjected to com-
pressive forces that produce wrinkling or folding
along the lines of weakness. As illustrated in
Fig.2.4(a) and (b) folding effectively shoilens the
Earth's crust, creating from the original level surface
a series of 'waves'. The upfolded waves are called
anticlines and the troughs or downfolds are syn-
clines. (Plate 2.E). The formation of up- and down-
folds closely resembles that of the wrinkles of a
table-cloth when it is pushed from either one or both
sides of the table.
In the great fold mountains of the world such as
the Himalayas, Rockies, Andes and Alps, due to the
complexity of the compressional forces, the folds
developed much more complicated forms. When the
Fig. 2.5 Types of folding
recumbenl fold
-+ 
comprssion
anticline 
asvmmelricfold
thrustolane {tault line)

crest of a fold is pushed too far, an overfold is
formed (Fig. 2.5). If it is pushed still further, it
becomes a recumbent fold (Fig. 2.5). In extreme
cases, fractures may occur in the crust, so that the
upper part of the recumbent fold slides forward over
the lower part along a thrust plane, forming an
overthrust fold. The overriding portion of the thrust
fold is termed a nappe (Fig. 2.5). Since the rock
strata have been elevated to great heights, some-
times measurable in kilometres, fold mountains may
be called mountains of elevation. The fold mountains
are also closeJy associated with volcanic activity.
They contain many active volcanoes, especially in
the Circum-Pacific fold mountain system. They also
contain rich rnineral resources such as tin, copper,
gold and petroleum.
2. Btock mountains. When the Earth's crust bends
folding occurs, but when it cracks, faulting takes
place (Fig. 2.6). Faulting may be caused by tension
or compression, forces which lengthen or shorten
the Earth's crust, causing a section of it to subside
or to rise above the surrounding level. Figs. 2.7(a)
and (b) explain how faulting causes horsts or block
mountains and their counterparts graben or rift val-
leys.
In Fig. 2.7(a) earth movements generate tensional
forces that tend to pull the crust apart, and faults arc
developed. If the block enclosed by the faults
remains as it is or rises. and the land on either side
subsides, the upstanding block becomes the horst or
block mountains. The faulted edges are very steep,
with scarp slopes and the summit is almost level, e.g.
the Hunsruck Mountains, the Vosges and Black For-
est of the Rhineland. Tension may also cause the
central portion to be let down between two adjacerit
Fig. 2,6 Normal. reverse and
transcurrent faults
.+ 
Ton3ion 
- 
*"
Fig.2.7(al Block mountains (horstl formed by tension when
faults develop
Fig. 2.7(b) Rift valley formed by compression when faults
develop
Later stage when overhanging sides are worn
fault blocks forming a graben or rift valley, which
will have steep walls. The East African Rift Valley
system is 4 828 km (3,000 miles) long, stretching
from East Africa through the Red Sea to Syria.
Compressional forces set up by earth movements
may produce a thrust or reverse fault and shorten
the crust. A block may be raised or lowered in rela-
"i 
-f
Fig.2.7(cl
back

Fig. 2.8 A volcano, or'mountain of accumulation' with suc-
cessive layers of lava
tion to surrounding areas. Fig. 2.7(b) illustrates a
rift valley formed in this way. In general large-scale
block mountains and rift valleys are due to tension
rather than compression. The faults may occur in
series and be further complicated by tilting and other
irregularities. Denudation through the ages modifies
faulted landforms.
3. Volcanic mountains. These are. in fact. volcanoes
which are built up from materials ejected from fis-
sures in the Earth's crust. The materials include mol-
ten lava, volcanic bombs, cinders, ashes, dust and
liquid mud. They fall around the vent in successive
layers, building up a characteristic volcanic cone
(Fig. 2.8). Volcanic mountains are often called
mountains of accumulation. They are common in the
Circum-Pacific belt and include such volcanic peaks
as Mt. Fuji (Japan), Mt. Mayon (Philippines), Mt.
Merapi (Sumatra), Mt. Agung (Bali) and Mt. Coto-
paxi (Ecuador). Further details are given in Chapter
3.
4. Residual rnountains. These are mountains evolved
by denudation. Where the general level of the land
has been lowered by the agents of denudation some
very resistant areas may remain and these form
residual mountains, e.g. Mt. Monadnock in U.S.A.
Residual mountains may also evolve from plateaux
which have been dissected by rivers into hills and
valleys like the ones illustrated in Fig. 2.9. Here the
ridges and peaks are all very similar in height.
Fig. 2.9 Residual mountains or mountains of denudation
Examples of dissected plateaux, where the down-cut-
ting streams have eroded the uplands into mountains
of denudation, are the Highlands of Scotland, Scan-
dinavia and the Deccan Plateau.
Types of Plateau
Plateaux are elevated uplands with extensive level
surfaces, and usually descend steeply to the sur-
rounding lowland. They are sometimes referred to
as tablelands. Like all highlands, plateaux are sub-
jected to erosional processes. As a result, their orig-
inal characteristics may be greatly altered. According
to their mode of formation and their physical
appearance, plateaux may be grouped into the fol-
lowing types.
1. Tectonic plateaux. These are formed by earth
movements which cause uplift, and are normally of
a considerable size, and fairly uniform altitude. They
include continental blocks like the Deccan Plateau
in India. Some of the tectonic plateaux may be tilted
like the Meseta of central lberia, or faulted like the
Harz of Germany.
When plateaux are enclosed by fold mountains,
they are known as intermont plateaux. Examples are
the Tibetan Plateau between the Himalayas and the
Kunlun, and the Bolivian Plateau between two
ranges of the Andes. Intermont plateaux are some
of the highest and the most extensive plateaux in the
world.
2. Volcanic plateaux. Molten lava may issue from
the Earth's crust and spread over its surface to form
successive sheets of. basaltic lava. These solidify to
form a lava plateau. Some of the better known vol-
canic plateaux are the Antrim Plateau of Northern
Ireland and the north-western part of the Deccan
Plateau. The most rernarkable plateau built by lava
is the Columbia-Snake Plateau which covers an area
almost twice as big as Malaysia. Each layer of the
lava flow is over 30 metres (100 feet) thick and the
entire depth of successive lava layers is estimated to
be almost 1.6 km (a mile).
3. Dissected plateaux. Through the continual pro-
cess of weathering and erosion by running water, ice
and winds, high and extensive plateaux are gradually
worn down, and their surfaces made irregular. In the
humid highlands, stream action and sometimes gla-
ciation cut deep, narrow valleys in the plateaux,
which are then described as dissected plateaux. An
example is the Scottish Highlands. In drier coun-
tries, vertical corrasion by rivers and abrasion by
winds will dissect the plateau into steep-sided tabular

masses termed mesas and buttes, intersected by deep
canyons. This is a common feature of arid and semi-
arid areas, e.g. in the south-western U.S.A. (Plate
7.D, page 71).
Many of the world's plateaux have rich mineral
resources and have been actively mined. The Afri-
can Plateau yields gold, diamonds, copper, man-
ganese and chromium. In the Brazilian Plateau,
there are huge resources of iron and manganese,
particularly in the Minas Gerais area. The Deccan
Plateau has deposits of manganese, coal and iron
and the plateau of Western Australia is rictr in gold
and iron.
Types of Plain
A plain is an area of lowland, either level or undu-
lating. It seldom rises more than a few hundred
metres above sea-level. There may be low hills
which will give a typical rolling topography. The
plains usually form the best land of a country and
are often intensively cultivated. Population and set-
tlements are normally concentrated here, and when
plains are traversed by rivers, as most of them are,
their economic importance may be even greater, e.g.
the Indo-Gangetic plain, the Mississippi plain and
the Chang Jiang (Yangtze) plain. Some of the most
extensive temperate plains are grasslands like the
Russian Steppes, the North American Prairies, and
the Argentinian Pampas. Plains may be grouped into
three major types based on their mode of formation.
l. Structural plains. These are the structurally
depressed areas of the world that make up some of
the most extensive natural lowlands on the Earth's
surface. They are formed by horizontally bedded
rocks, relatively undisturbed by the crustal move-
ments of the Earth. They include such great plains
as the Russian Platform. the Great Plains of the
U.S.A. and the central lowlands of Australia.
2. Depositional plains. These are plains formed by
the deposition of materials brought by various agents
of transportation. They are comparatively level but
rise gently towards adjacent highlands. Their fertil-
ity and economic development depend greatly on
the types of sediment that are laid down.
Some of the largest depositional plains are due to
deposition by large rivers. Active erosion in the
upper course results in large quantities of alluvium
being brought dowr: to the lower course and depos-
ited to form extenslve alluvial plains, flood plains
and deltaic plains. They form the most productive
agricultural plains of the world, intensively tilled and
very densely populated. The Nile delta of Egypt is
noted for rice and cotton cultivation, the Ganges
delta for rice and jute growing, while the plain of
North China, where the Huang He (Hwang Ho) has
spread out a thick mantle of alluvium, supports a
wide range of crops.
Glaciers and ice-sheets may deposit a widespread
mantle of unsorted fluvio-glacial sands and gravels
in the outwash plain or may drop boulder clay, a
mixture of various sizes of boulders and clay, to form
a till plain or drift plain. Outwash plains are usually
barren lands, e.g. some parts of the Netherlands and
northern Germany, but boulder clay may be very
valuable farming land, e.g. the Mid-West of the
U.S.A. and East Anglia in England.
In coastal regions waves and winds often drive
beach materials, mud, sand or shingle, landwards
and deposit them on the coastal plain to form marine
swamps, mudflats, tidal and estuarine lowlands. An
appreciable portion of the coastal lowlands of Bel-
gium, the Netherlands and the Gulf Coast of the
U.S.A. were formed in this.way. Uplift may raise
the coastal lowlands slightly and they then form an
emergent coastal plain, e.g. the coastal margins from
Florida to Texas.
Winds may blow aeolian deposits-very fine parti-
cles known as loess-from interior deserts or barren
surfaces and deposit them upon hills, valleys or
plains forming a /oess plateau, as in north-west
China, or a loess plain, as in the Pampas of Argen-
tina. The loess helps to level an undulating plain by
filling up grooves and depressions. Many of the
loess-covered plains in the world are fertile agricul-
tural regions.
3. Erosional plains. These plains are carved by the
agents of erosion. Rain, rivers, ice and wind help to
smooth out the irregularities of the Earth's surface,
and in terms of millions of years, even high moun-
tains can be reduced to low undulating plains. Such
plains of denudation are described as peneplains a
word meaning 'almost-plains' (Fig. 2.10).
Fig,2,10 Peneplain
In the formation of a peneplain in humid conditions. the hills
are both lowered and worn back to give an undulating low-
land.

Rivers, in their course from source to sea, deepen
their valleys and widen their banks. The projecting
spurs are cut back so that the level ground bordering
the river is constantly widened. At the same time the
higher land between the rivers is gradually lowered.
In glaciated regions, glaciers and ice-sheets
scoured and levelled the land forming ice-scoured
plains. Hollows scooped out by the ice are now filled
by lakes. There are extensive ice-scoured plains in
northern Europe and northern Canada. Finland is
estimated to have 35 000 lakes, occupying l0 per
cent of the total land surface of the country.
In arid and semi-arid regions, wind deflation
sweeps away much of the eroded desert materials,
lowering the level of land and forming extensive
Fig.2.11 Pediplain
In the formation of a pediplain in arid or semi-arid condi-
tions, the hills are worn back to form a gently sloping plain
but some steep hills remain. These are called inselbergs.
plains, e.g. the gravelly or stony desert plains called
reg in Africa. Mechanical weathering in arid and
semi-arid ateas wears back the mountain slopes to
leave gently sloping pediments or pediplains
(Fig. 2.11).
Ouestions and Exercises
1. Either: Attempt a classification of mountains
according to their mode of formation;
Or: Explain why a knowledge of rocks and their
structures is essential in the interpretation of
landforms.
2. With the aid of diagrams, explain the difference
in appearance and formation of any three of the
following:
(a) folds and faults;
(b) dissected plateau and intermont plateau;
(c) alluvial plain and peneplain;
(d) sima and sial;
(e) lithosphere and barysphere.
3. What is a sedimentary rock? In what way is it
different from igneous rocks? Describe the var-
ious sources from which sedimentary rocks may
be derived. (Quote actual examples of sedimen-
tary rocks to support your answer.)
Sample Objective Ouestions
1. In which of the following is a know-
ledge of the underlying rocks /easl
essential?
A oil drilling
B weather studies
C soil analysis
D road construction
For each of the following:
a young fold mountain
a rift valley
a loess plain
(a) Draw a simple diagram to show its charac-
teristic relief.
(b) Explain its origin.
(c) Name and locate a region where such a fea-
' ture may be found.
Either: Describe and explain the following
selected landforms:
(a) Antrim Plateau;
(b) Russian Platform;
(c) Scottish Highlands.
Or: Explain the meaning of any four of the fol-
lowing terms connected with the study of land-
forms and Earth's crust:
basalt, orogenesis, recumbent fold, fossiliferous
rocks, horst, syncline.
4.
5.
Photograph 2.8 on page 21 shows a
syncline which is the direct result of
A folding
B faulting
C metamorphosis
D mass movement
3. Rocks differ from one another in
these respects ercep,
A texture
B permeability
C salinity
D mode ofoccurrence
,)q

4. The interior layer of the Earth which
rs subjected to great heat and pres'
sure is known technically as the
barysphere. Which part of the Earth
does it refer to?
A the core
B the crust
C the mantle
D the ocean
5. The diagram bGlow attempts to illus-
tlate the formation of
A fold mountains
B block mountains
C residual mountains
D intermont plateau
AcE I
--T
^l

