Chapter 22 The Cool Temperate Western Margin
(British Type) Climate
is confined mainly to the coastlands of British
Columbia.
In the southern hemisphere, the climate is expe-
rienced in southern Chile, Tasmania and most parts
of New Z,ealand, particularly in South Island. The
surrounding large expanses of water have increased
the maritime nature of the climate here (Fig. 22.1).
Glimate
Temperature. The mean annual temperatures are
usually between 4 "C (40 "F) and 16 "C (60 "F). The
warmest month in London as illustrated in the tem-
perature graph of London, Fig. 22.2(a) is 1.7'C
(63'F) and the coldest month is just around 4 oC
(40'F), thus giving an annual temperature range of
only 13 'C (24 "F), whith is comparatively small for
Distribution
The cool temperate western margins are under the
permanent influence of the Westerlies all round the
year. They are also regions of much cyclonic activity,
typical of Britain, and are thus said to experience
the British type of climate. From Britain, the cli-
matic belt stretches far inland into the lowlands of
North-West Europe, including such regions as
northern and western France, Belgium, the Neth-
erlands, Denmark, westefn Norway and also north-
western lberia. There is so much oceanic influence
on both the temperature and the precipitation that
the climate is also referred to as the North-West
European Maritime Climate. In North America, the
high Rockies prevent the on-shore Westerlies from
penetrating far inland and the British type of climate
Fig.22.1 Regions with Cool Temperate Western Margin Cli-
mate (British Wpe)
" 
f 
British type of climate
scale:1:215OO0OOO
ffi__
*tlYf

-a
=.E
PE
21170
16/60
10/50
-1l30
o/0
JFMAMJJASOND
months
Hobart 
J
T6mp. "c: 
"r., 
Pr6ip. lmml: 46
t.8
F 
M A 
M J. 
J 
A 
S O N 
O r.ngc/rorl
17 15 13 rt 
I 
9 il 
12 .t4 16 
9"C
62 59 55 51 41 46 48 51 54 57 60 
16"F.
3{t 43 48 46 56 53 48 53 56 64 5t 
6tomm
1.5 f .7 l9 
1.4 2.2 2.1 19 2.1 2.2 2.5 2.O 
2it irch6
Fis.22.2(bl
British type of climate in the southern hemisphere
Place: Hobart, Tasmania (43'S. 147"81
Aftitude: 54 metres |d'77 feetl
Annual precipitation: 610 mm (24 inches)
Annual temperature range: 9"C (17'- 8'C/16'F (16'- 46'F)
regions as a whole may be described as equable with
moderately warm summers and fairly mild winters.
It is quite apparent from Fig. 22.2(b) of Hobart,
Tasmania that the British type of climate in the
southern hemisphere is even more equable. Lack of
continental land masses in Tasmania, New Zealand
and southern Chile means that extremes of temper-
ature are not likely at all. Hobart has mid-summer
temperatures of not more than 17'C (62 'F) while its
coldest month in July (winter in the southern hem-
isphere) is barely below 8 "C (46 "F). The annual
temperature range is reduced to only 9'C (16 "F),
which is unusual for the middle latitudes. This is in
fact, the average figure for all the maritime stations
in the southern continents where insularity overrides
all other factors. The annual ranges of other south-
erly stations are Dunedin 8'C (15 'F), Christchurch
10 'C (18 'F), Valdivia 8 "C (14 'F) and Punta Arenas
9 "C (L7 "F) (the last two stations are in southern
Chile). The oceanic influences not only keep the
winters very mild but also keep the summers cool.
Some geographers have described these southerly
islands as 'the favoured isles' which has much truth
in it.
Precipitation. The British type of climate has ade-
quate rainfall throughout the year with a tendency
21170
16/60
10/50
-1l30
-o
-9
E.:
CF
8E
';
ir!
Fono
Eo
.g
Ef 
...
6o*
6>
E-
o
0/0
London:
Temp. "c:
Precip. (mml:
(inchei):
Fig.22.2lal
MJ 
J
months
M
JFMAMJJASOND
16 8 
17 17 14 l0 
39 40 42 47 53 s9 63 62 57 50 44 40
48 43 46 3a 46 51 6t 56 46 66 6t 
1.9 f .7 1.8 1.5 1.8 20 2.4 2.2 1.8 2.6 2.4 2.4
range/total
r3"c
24" F.
6?O mm
24 inches
British type of climate in the northern hemisphere
Place: London, British lsles (51" N, 0'Wl
Altitude: 5.5 metres (18 feet)
Annual precipitation: 610 mm (24 inches)
Annual temperature range: 13 "C (17'-4"C1/24'F (63 "-39 "F)
its latitude (51" N). Summers are, in fact, never very
warm. Monthly temperatures of over 18 "C (65 "F)
even in mid-summer are rare. 'Heat waves', as they
are popularly called (that is a short spell of warm
summer days) are a welcome feature in such cool
temperate latitudes, where people do not often see
enough of the sun. The climate is ideal for maximum
comfort and mental alertness. People can work for
long hours without feeling drowsy and lethargic as
they do in the tropics. There appears to be some
direct relationship between climate and Man's out-
put of work. It is no wonder that the cool temperate
regions are some of the most advanced parts of the
world. Winters are abnormally mild, and no stations
actually record mean January temperatures below
freezing-point in north-western Europe. This is
attributable to the warming effect of the warm North
Atlantic Drift and the prevalence of the South-Wes-
terlies. It has been estimated that the coastal stations
of the region are almost L4"C (25 oF) warmer in Jan-
uary than corresponding stations of the same lati-
tude in the interiors. Night frosts do occur and snow
falls in winter too. Sometimes, unusual cool spells,
caused by the invasion of cold polar continental air
from the interiors, may hit the western margins for
a number of weeks. The climate of the maritime

towards a slight winter or autumn maximum from
cyclonic sources. Since the rain-bearing winds come
from the west, the western margins have the heaviest
rainfall. The amount decreases eastwards with
increasing distance from the sea. Though both the
quoted stations London and Hobart have 610 mm
(24 inches) of precipitation a year, the actual amount
varies quite considerably from place to place. Relief
can make great differences in the annual amount.
For example the western slopes of the Southern Alps
of South Island, New Zealand have as much as
5 080 mm (200 inches) of rainfall (mainly orographic
rain) while the Canterbury Plain, in the rain-shadow
area has as little as 635 mm (25 inches). Similarly,
the Lake District of Britain has well over 2 540 mm
(100 inches) in contrast to only 610 mm (24 inches)
in East Anglia. It is therefore difficult to say how
much annual rainfall is typical of the British type of
climate. Perhaps, a useful guide would be to confine
ourselves to lowland regions which normally have
508 to 1016 mm (20 to 40 inches) ayear, e.g.584
mm (23 inches) in Paris, 711 mm (28 inches) in
Dublin, 838 mm (33 inches) in Seattle and 940 mm
(37 inches) in Dunedin. Generally, western coastal
stations are wetter. Vancouver has | 524 mm (60 in-
ches) of rain, Bergen, 2134 mm (84 inches) and
Valdivia, 2 667 mm (105 inches). They are ex-
ceeded in the annual amount only by the highland
stations as mentioned earlier.
The seasons. As in other temperate regions there
are four distinct seasons in the British climate type.
Light snowfalls can be expected in the winter months
normally only of short duration because of the com-
paratively mild weather. But over the highlands such
as the Scandinavian Mountains and the American
Rockies, snowfall is heavy and feeds the mountain
glaciers that move down the valleys. Winter is the
season of cloudy skies, foggy and misty mornings,
and many rainy days from the passing depressions.
Fi1.22.3 Some deciduous trees
Out at sea, gales are frequent and can be dangerous
to shipping. Spring is the driest and the most refresh-
ing season when people emerge from the depressing
winter to see everything becoming green again. This
is followed by the long, sunny summer. Sun-bathers,
picnickers and sightseers are out in the open to enjoy
themselves. With the roar of gusty winds and the fall
of 'golden' leaves, autumn is ushered in, and the
cycle repeats itself. This type of climate with its four
distinct seasons is something that is conspicuously
absent in the tropics.
Natural Vegetation
The cool temperate western margin type of climate
with its well distributed moderately heavy rainfall
(760 to 1 140 mm/30 to 45 inches) supports deci-
duous forest. The trees shed their leaves in the cold
season. This is an adaptation for protecting them-
selves against the winter snow and frost. Shedding
begins in autumn, the 'fall' season, during which the
leaves fall and are scattered bv the winds. Leaves of
deciduoui trees are thin and delicate, requiring no
protective devices against drought as in the Medi-
terranean or desert regions since they remain on the
trees only in the warmer parts of the year. The
golden-brown leaves and the bare branches present
a very interesting scene. When they are in leaf the
deciduous trees have typical rounded outlines with
thick trunks and out-spreading branches that yield
valuable temperate hardwood (Fig.22.3). Some of
the more common species include oak, elm, ash,
birch, beech, poplar, and hornbeam. In the wetter
areas grow willow, alder and aspen. Elsewhere are
found other species, e.g. chestnut, sycamore, maple,
and lime.
Unlike the equatorial forests, the deciduous trees
are less luxuriant. They occur in pure stands and
have greater lumbering value from the commercial
Weeping Willow
Ash
Horse Chestnut
Silver Maple

point of view. The open nature of the forests with
sparse undergrowth is useful in logging operations.
Easy penetration means much cost can be saved in
the movement of the logs. The deciduous hardwoods
arq excellent for both fuel and industrial purposes.
In Tasmania, the temperate eucalyptus are also
extensively felled for the lumbering industry. Higher
up the mountains in the Scandinavian highlands, the
Rockies, southern Andes and the Southern Alps of
New Zealand, the deciduous trees are generally
replaced by the conifers which can survive a higher
altitude, a lower temperature and poorer soils.
Economic Development
A very large part of the deciduous woodlands have
been cleared for fuel, timber or agriculture. The
dense population necessitates the removal of the
lowland forests, particularly for the plough. In Brit-
ain, there is only 4 per cent of the original forest left.
A large range of cereals, fruits and root crops are
raised, mainly for home consumption rather than for
export. North-West Europe, which includes some of
the most crowded parts of the globe, has little sur-
plus for export. [t is, in fact, a net importer of food
crops, especially wheat from almost all parts of the
wheat lands for bread-making and other food items.
The region differs from many others in its unprec-
edented industrial advancement. The countries are
concerned in the production of machinery, chemi-
cals, textiles and other manufactured articles rather
than agriculture, fishing or lumbering, though these
activities are well represented in some of the coun-
tries. Fishing is particularly important in Britain,
Norway and British Columbia. Since the manufac-
turing aspect of industrial geography will be dealt
with in much greater detail in Chapter 28, we shall
Fil.22.4 Some temperate
vegetables
deal here with the agricultural development of the
region.
l. Market gardening. Though market gardening
is practised throughout the world wherever there is
a large urban population, nowhere else is it so highly
specialized as in North-West Europe. Several factors
account for this. All the north-western European
countries (Britain, France, West Germany, Benelux
and Denmark) are highly industrialized and have
high population densities. There are more towns and
cities than in other continents despite its small size.
It is understandable that the demand for fresh veg-
etables, green salads, €BgS, meat, milk and fruits will
be tremendous. The city dwellers, the factory work-
ers and the civil servants who make up the bulk of
the urban population consume large quantities of
fresh provisions daily and these must be provided by
local farmers if freshness of the produce is to be
ensured.
In north-western Europe intensive market garden-
ing is carried out in many specialized areas, e.g. the
Vales of York and Evesham in the United Kingdom
where climate. soil and other factors best suit this
form of agriculture. Farms are normally small,
located near large cities or industrial areas. Soils,
whether silty, loamy or podzolic, are carefully main-
tained at a high degree of fertility. Very selective
fertilizers are applied depending on the type of crops
in cultivation. Farming is carried out intensively,
aiming at high yield and maximum cash returns. As
the crops are perishable, a good network of trans-
port is indispensable. The produce such as lettuce,
cabbages, cauliflowers, tomatoes, onions, peas and
fruits (Fig. 22.4). are seldom shipped but conveyed
by high-speed conveyances such as trucks or vans.
Perhaps a more appropriate term to use is truck
farming, which is commonly used in the U.S.A.

In a few instances, warmer weather or better soils
as in south-west England (Devon and Cornwall), can
also induce farmers to take to market gardening
despite their remoteness from the more populated
districts. Early vegetables, early potatoes and to-
matoes reach London from the Canary Islands,
the Channel Islands, and from Brittany, in north-
west France. Similarly, bulbs and flowers from
the Netherlands and eggs, bacon and other
dairy products from Denmark are sent to most
of the major industrial centres of Europe in almost
perfect condition for household consumption. The
horticultural industry in the Netherlands is so highly
specialized that Dutch tulips and bulbs are flown by
the K.L.M. (Dutch Airlines) to Rome, paris,
22.4 An English farm. Notice the well-wooded countryside.
Trees remain in hedges and field_boundaries though the for-
est has been cleared. Central Office of information, London
Zurich, and London. In Australia, high-speed boats
ply across the Bass Strait daily from Tasmania to
rush vegetables, tomatoes, apples and beans to most
of the large cities in mainland Australia. It is no
wonder the Australians nicknamed Tasmania the
'garden state'.
2. Mixed farming. Throughout Britain and north-
western Europe, farmers practise both arable farm-
ing (cultivation of crops on ploughed land) and pas-
toral farming (keeping animals on grass meadows).
Crops may be raised for cash sales or as fodder for
cattle or sheep. The proportion of crops and animals
in the farm at any time depends to a great extent on
the type of soil, the price of the cereals and the
demand for animals and animal products. The
2rl

farmers also plant a few fruit trees (apples, pears,
plums), rear pigs, keep poultry, mainly for eggs, and
even have bees for honey. There is such a great
variety in the farms that the term mixed farming is
most aptly applied.
Amongst the cereals, wheat, is the most exten-
sively grown, almost entirely for home consumption
because of the very dense population in north-west-
ern Europe. At one time, some of the European
countries (France, Denmark and the Netherlands)
used to be wheat exporters, but the keen competi-
tion from the new wheat lands of the New World
forced most of the farmers to divert their interest to
other more profitable uses of their land such as mar-
ket gardening, dairying or an intensive form of mix-
ed farming. With the rise of industry, more arable
farms are being devoured by factories and wheat is
now a net import item in Europe.
The next most important cereal raised in the
mixed farm is barley. The better quality barley is
sold to the breweries for beer-making or whisky dis-
tilling and is raised preferably in the drier areas.
Malting barley is thus grown in south-eastern Britain
near the hop-growing area (hops are also used for
beer) where rainfall is less than 760 mm (30 inches).
On heavy soils or wetter regions, barley is grown
mainly as an animal fodder, sometimes mixed with
oats as'dredge corn'. Both are raised in crop rota-
tions with a leguminous crop (beans or clover) and
a root crop (turnips or sugar-beet).
The most important animals kept in the mixed
farm are cattle. North-western Europe was originally
the home of many world renowned cattle breeds,
e.g. Guernsey, Ayrshire and Friesian, which are first
class dairy cattle for milk production. The countries
bordering the North Sea (Britain, Denmark, the
Netherlands) are some of the most advanced dairy-
ing countries where cattle are kept on a scientific and
intensive basis. Europeans drink more milk than
anybody else except the New Zealanders. In the
United Kingdom, a person drinks almost a pint of
milk a day! From milk, other important dairy prod-
ucts are derived. These ate butter, cheese, creem,
and skimmed milk or casein, a raw material for mak-
ing plastics, paper and drugs. The temperate western
margin type of climate is almost ideal for intensive
dairying. Cheese is a specialized product of the
Netherlands, from Edam and Gouda. From Den-
mark comes high-quality butter, of which she ranks
with New Zealand as one of the world's greatest
exporter. In Devon and Cornwall clotted cream is
made, which is less perishable than fresh milk. It can
be sent over longer journeys without being contam-
inated. The Swiss have also made excellent use of
their alpine pastures for keeping dairy cattle. Fresh
milk is converted into various forms of condensed
or evaporated milk, and exported around the world
for baby-feeding, confectionery, ice-cream and choc-
olate making.
Besides dairying, some cattle are kept as beef-
cattle, e.g. the Hereford and Aberdeen Augus, but
their numbers are very small in comparison with
those of Argentina or Australia, where meat pro-
duction is the primary concern. The high rate of beef
consumption in Europe (about 18 kg/40 lb. a year
per head of population in the United Kingdom)
necessitates large imports of frozen and chilled beef.
In the mixed farms in Europe, farmers keep cattle
also with a view of enriching their fields with the
animal dung. The pigs and poultry act as scavengers
that feed on the leftovers from root crops and dairy
processes. In this way, Denmark is able to export
large quantities of bacon from pigs that are fed on
the skimmed milk, a by-product of butter-making.
Fresh chickens' eggs from the farms and more
recently, from large poultry yards also form part of
the export products of Denmark. Sheep are kept
both for wool and mutton. In British Columbia.
mixed farming is restricted only to the most favoured
parts of the Western lowlands, the region being so
mountainous and thickly forested.
3. Sheep rearing. This is well developed in some
parts of the British type of climate. Britain is the
home of some of the best known sheep breedS, €.9.
Leicester, Lincolns and Southdowns which are dual-
purpose, noted for mutton as well as wool. With the
greater pressure exerted on land by increased urban-
ization, industrialization and agriculture, sheep rear-
ing is being pushed further and further into the less
favoured areas. The principal sheep areas are on
foothills, well-drained uplands, chalk and limestone
scarplands, and the light, sandy coasts. In Britain,
the major sheep areas are the Pennines, (Swaledale
breeds) Scottish Highlands (the Blackface), the
Southern Uplands (Cheviot), the Welsh Mountains
(Black Welsh) and the scarplands of south-eastern
England (Romney Marsh). Britain was once an
exporter of wool and her woollen textiles industry
began with local Pennine wool, but today with a
greater population and a more intensive use of her
better agricultural land, she has neither surplus wool
nor mutton for export. She has become instead an
important exporter of British pedigree animals to the
newer sheep lands of the world. This is equally true

. ):'- 
:a.l; ':
'1\ ,,:?n
. ,$;:
'.'-- 4 
-.
+',.. -:""-
.r,_!1,-- ) --;
.,: 
- a 
,
.':2't,,: :*l
22.8 A sheep station near Hawkes Bay, New Zealand New
Zealand High Commission Malaysia
of other north-western European sheep areas, in
which industrialization has effectively altered the
pattern of land use.
In the southern hemisphere, sheep rearing is the
chief occupation of New Zealand, with its greatest
concentration in the Canterbury Plain. It has been
estimated that for every New Zealander, there are 20
sheep. Many factors have led to this unprecedented
growth during the past century including extensive
meadows, a mild temperate climate, well-drained
level ground, scientific animal breeding, and last.
but most vital, the development of refrigeration,
which enables frozen or chilled Canterbury lamb and
Corriedale mutton to reach every corner of the
globe. Though New Zealand has only 6 per cent of
the world's sheep population, it accounts for two-
thirds of the world's mutton exports, and one-sixth
of the world's wool exports. In Tasmania and south-
(ri
-tld' 'r-{.
N!
j]=
ern Chile, sheep rearing has always been a predom-
inant occupation with surplus sheep products for the
international trade (Plate 22.8).
4. Other agricultural activities. Apart from market
gardening and mixed farming which have been
described in greater detail, the British type of climate
also supporfs a number of other important crops.
Amongst the food crops, potatoes feature prominent-
ly in the domestic economy of the cool temperate
regions. It is the staple food in supplementing wheat
or bread for millions of people. In terms of starch,
it yields far more food than any cereals and_ can be
cultivated over a wide range of climatic and soil
types. But normally a cooler and more northerly lat-
itude is preferred because the crop will be less prone
to the attack of 'blight', a virus disease that is par-
ticularly infectious in warm and humid countries.
Since the introduction of the crop by the Spanish
-$.*
fi:e
r$
t,I

conquerors ffom the Andean states of Peru and
Bolivia in the sixteenth century, potato-growing has
spread far and wide in Europe. Today almost two-
thirds of the world's annual production of potatoes
comes from Europe, of which Poland, Germany,
France and the United Kingdom are the major pro-
ducers. Besides its principal use as a substitute for
bread, large quantities of potatoes are also con-
sumed as animal fodder and as a source of industrial
alcohol.
Another interesting crop that is found almost
exclusively in north-western Europe (including
European U.S.S.R.) and part of the U.S.A. is
sugar-beet. The need for such a crop was greatly felt
during the Napoleonic Wars around 1800 when mil-
itary blockades caused a scarcity of sugar. High
prices of imported tropical sugar (from sugar-cane)
drove many governments of the temperate lands to
think seriously about the vital importance of secur-
ing a certain amount of self-sufficiency in their sugar
requirements. The first beet-sugar factory in Europe
was established in 1801. Farmers were given subsi-
dies (aids or allowances) to induce them to devote
at least part of their farm to the crop. Since then
sugar-beet has become an integral part of many
European farms. It is grown either on special beet
farms for cash sales or in conjunction with cereals
in crop rotation. The beet is crushed for sugar and
the green tops are used as animal fodder. The crop
thrives best in the warmer and drier east of Britain
and in mainland Europe. The highest sugar yield is
obtained when the autumn is both dry and sunny.
Attempts to grow the crop in the colder north or the
wetter west have so far been rather unsuccessful,
except in some sheltered localities. In Britain, most
of the beet-sugar factories are located in the Fens
and East Anglia.
Ouestions and Exercises
1. The following statements attempt to describe
a type of climate:
'. . .. .. Westerlies come all the year round
there is a tendency towards an autumn
or winter maximum of rainfall . . .. . . light
snow falls in winter 
ports are never fro-
zen . . .. . . but frosts do occur on cold nights
the seasons are very distinct
and the climate is very favourable for maxi-
mum human output . . .. . .'.
(a) Name the type of climate that it describes.
(b) Locate with the aid of a sketch map a
region where such a type of climate is best
represented.
(c) Explain why such a type of climate is ideal
for human habitation.
2. Describe and explain with the aid of sketch
maps the essential differences between the var-
ious climate types found within the cool tem-
perate zone.
3. (a) What are the characteristic features of
temperate deciduous forests?
(b) Name the various species of deciduous for-
ests and account for some of their indus-
trial uses.
(c) Explain why there is comparatively little of
the original forest left.
Write a geographical account of any three of
the following economic activities:
(a) mixed farming;
(b) sugar-beet cultivation;
(c) cool temperate orchard farming;
(d) sheep rearing;
(e) woollen textile industry.
Give an explanatory account of any nryo of. the
following:
(a) The Netherlands is a major exporter of
butter and cheese.
(b) Sheep outnumber the population of New
Zealandby 2O: l.
(c) No country produces and exports more
wool than Australia.
(d) Market-gardening is a product of urbani-
zation.
(a) The cool temperate British type of climate
is best represented by countries bordering
the North Sea in Western Europe. Name
five of these countries.
(b) Give a brief description of the climate over
the four distinct seasons.
(c) Why is the British type of climate relatively
'small in extent' in the southern hemi-
sphere?
4.
5.
6.
2t4

7 . Make a comparative study of the deciduous 
riences the British type of climate is British
forest and the coniferous forest under these 
Columbia.
headings: 
(b) There are very few natural deciduous
(a) location; 
forests left in Europe.
(b) vegetational features 
(c) The British type of climate has very dis-
(c) their commercial importance. 
tinct seasons.
8. Countries with the cool temperate British type 
(d) The British type of climate supports both
of climate are some of the most advanced in 
crops and animals.
the world. In what ways does the climate 10. (a) What types of farming are best developed
favour their rapid development? 
in regions with the British type of climate?
9. Explain any three of the following: 
(b) Describe the farming calendar for any one
(a) The only part of North America that expe- 
type of farming familiar to you.
Sample Objective Ouestions
l. The most wetcome feature of the 
C people prefer to work in factories 
A south-east Australia
British type of climate is its 
D the deciduous trees have low 
B north-east U.S.A.
A heavy precipitation 
commercial value 
C north-western Europe
B low temperature 
D eastern coastland of the U.S.S.R.
C frost-free nights 
3. Market gardening is characterized
D distinct four seasons 
by these f.eatures except 
5. Much of the deciduous forest in
A farms are rather small 
Europe has been cleared to make
2. Large-scale lumbering is restricted 
B the land is very intensively tilled 
way'for the following e:cepr
to certain parts of the British Isles 
C little personal attention is needed 
A farming
because 
D it is scientifically managed 
B fishing
A there is very little natural vegeta- 
C mining
tion left 
4. The cool temperate British type of 
D industries
B lumbering is not in private hands 
climate is best represented in

