PART 2
Weather, Climate
and Vegetation

Chapter 13 Weather
The Difference between Weather and
Glimate
The term weather should not be confused with cli-
mate, though they are very closely related to each
other in the study of meteorology and climatology.
We don't hear people saying that the climate of the
day is warm or cold, but we do talk of warm
weather, a cold morning, a sunny afternoon, a rainy
day or a chilly night. Any casual remarks about the
atmospheric conditions of a certain place at a certain
tirne are about weather. It is never static, and thus
cannot be generalized. In the same country, even
over a small area, the weather can vary tremen-
dously. It may be sunny in one part of the district,
but raining heavily a few kilometres away. Strong
gales may be experienced along the coasts while the
interior may be relatively calm. It is important to
realize that any place can be subjected to haphazard
changes in weather at any time.
When we speak of climate, we mean the average
atmospheric conditions of an area over a consider-
able time. For climatic averages, a minimum period
of 35 years is desirable. This involves the systematic
observation, recording and processing of the various
elements of climate such as rainfall, temperature,
humidity, air pressure, winds, clouds and sunshine
before any standardization of the climatic means or
averages can be arrived at. The climate of Malaysia
is described as hot, wet, equatorial climate which is
a summing up of the average everyday climate of the
country throughout the year.
The degree of variability in the climate or weather
of a country also differs. Generally speaking, the
climate of temperate latitudes is far more variable
than that of the tropics. T'he climate of the British
Isles is so changeable that many people have com-
mented that 'Britain has no climate, only weather'.
Conversely, the climate of Egypt is so static that it
makes a good deal of sense when people say that
'Egypt has no weather, only climate'.
The lmportance of Climate and
Weather
The profound influence of climate and weather over
Man's activities can be seen from his everyday life.
Forces of nature have regulated to a very great
extent the sort of food we eat, what we wear, how
we live and work. Our mental alertness, our physical
characteristics and even our racial differences when
closely examined have at least some relationship
with climate. The direction of winds once controlled
the pattern of trading routes. The safety of modern
air communications is closely tied to accurate mete-
orological reports from the ground stations. Despite
the advances made in science and technology, farm-
ers and their crops are still at the mercy of the cli-
mate and the weather. Conditions of temperature,
precipitation and humidity may promote or discour-
age the growth of fungus and diseases which may be
injurious to both men and crops. Death rates are
normally high in tropical countries and low in
deserts, because germs are not transmitted readily
in regions of high temperature and low humidity.
Cool, fresh mountain air is always good for health.
Weather Bureaux or Meteorological Stations are
scattered all over the globe, including the oceans,
using some of the most up-to-date weather instru-
ments to gather a wide range of data as raw materials
for the construction of weather maps or synoptic
charts. Though men are still unable to tame the
forces of nature such as floods, droughts, typhoons
or hurricanes, a sound knowledge of the trends or
the weather systems can often help to avoid or
reduce the seriousness of the calamities. Profes-
sional meteorologists are able to forecast the
weather fairly accurately from local observations. A
fall in the barometer, a change of cloud type, a
bright sunset or even a whisper of the wind can be
very useful tips to a weather forecaster in detecting
what is going to happen next. A casual glance at the
sky will be sufficient for a weather expert to sum up
the conditions of the atmosphere.
Today farmers are becoming more and more
dependent upon meteorological services. A knowl-
edge of the likely weather of a place will be useful
for a farmer to plan his work for the season or the
year. Frequent agricultural bulletins issued by the
Meteorological Office will assist farmers to take due
precautions against frosts, hail, heavy snowfall or a
period of possible drought. Sailors at sea are warned
promptly of any on-coming gale or typhoon. Modern
air transport, military operations, geographical
t14

expeditions, even important games and outings,
often take due consideration of meteorological
reports. A fair knowledge of the weather is not only
useful but often essential.
The Elements of Weather and Climate
To collect various climatic data to prepare maps and
charts of them, the following elements of climate are
normally observed and measured by weather instru-
ments.
1. Rainfall. Rainfall including other forms of pre-
cipitation (snow, sleet and hail) is always measured
by a metal instrument called a rain-gauge (Fig. 13 . 1a) .
It consists of a copper cylinder with a metal funnel
either 13 cm or 20 cm (5 inches or 8 inches) in diam-
eter, which leads into a smaller copper container or
a glass bottle. The hole in the funnel that leads down
to the container is very small so that evaporation of
the collected rain is minimized. The gauge should be
at least a third of a metre (one foot) above the
ground and firmly fastened, to avoid splashing. The
instrument should be sited well away from tall build-
ings, high trees and other objects which would
shelter it.
The measurement of. the rainfall is done by remov-
ing the funnel, emptying the rain in the container
into a graduated cylinder with a 3.8 cm (1+
inch) diameter (Fig. 13.lb). The reading should be
done at eye-level and to an accuracy of 0.25 mm
(0.01 inch). For greater accuracy, a special kind of
taper measure as shown in Fig. 13.1(c) which tapers
at the bottom may be used. It gives an accuracy up
to 0.125 mm (0.005 inch). Twenty-five mm (an inch)
of rainfall means the amount of water that would co-
ver the ground.to a depth of 25 mm, (1 inch) provided
none evaporated, drained off or percolate away. For
meteorological recordings, a rain-day is reckoned as
a period of 24 hours with at least 0.25 mm (0.01
inch) or more rain being recorded. If the amount
exceeds I mm (0.04 inch) it is considered a wet day.
For general reckoning, the average rainfall for
Malaysia is less than 7.6 mm (0.3 inch) a day. Only
a torrential downpour can account for more than
25 mm (1 inch) of rainfall in a day. The rain-gauge
must be examined every day. In temperate regions,
snowfall is carefully melted by warming the funnel
and then measured. For all practical purposes, 25 to
30 cm (10 to 12 inches) of snow may be considered
as equivalent to 25 mm (1 inch) of rain.
mm/in
n.z fi
f
ro.z F1
FI-i-+'
z.^ Fi
.1._
5.0 r-1
H
H
,z.s Fl
\Fr
Fig. 13.1(b) An ordinary measuring cylinder
l1s
Fig. 13.1(c) A calibrated
taper measure
Fig. 13.1(a) A rain gauge

Total annual rainfall
MJJASOND
months
Fig. 13.2 A rainfall histogram showing the monthly rainfall
of Kota Kinabalu, East Malaysia.
The daily records of rainfall will be added at the
end of the month to find the total rainfall for that
month. The total of each month is again added at
the end of the year to find the annual rainfall. The
mean annual rainfall is obtained from the averages
of annual rainfall taken over a long period of say 35
years. For plotting in rainfall maps, places having
the same mean annual rainfall are joined by a line
called an isohyet, as shown in many atlases. Rainfall
can also be graphically depicted as shaded rainfall
columns, one for each month of the year as in
Fig. 13.2 or in dispersal diagrams, one dot for each
year for as many years as possible as in Fig. i3.3.
The former illustrates the monthly rainfall regime
Fig. 13.3 A rainfall dispersal diagram for Gibraltar for 35
years
rainfall in inches 
rainfall in mm
of mercury
76 cm (29.9")
weight of air
(average 14.7 lb/sq. i
(1.o3 kg/cm2)l
atmospheric
pressu re
L'*"
Fig. 13.4 A mercury barometer 
contarner
over a year and the latter shows at a glance the range
of dry and wet years for 35 years.
2. Pressure. Air is made up of a number of mixed
gases and has weight. It therefore exerts a pressure
on the earth's surface which varies from place to
place and from time to time. This force that presses
on the surface of any object can be fairly accurately
measured. The instrument for measuring pressure is
a barometer, as shown in Fig. 13.4, invented by the
scientist Galileo and his assistant Torricelli in 1643.
The ordinary mercury barometer consists of a long
glass tube, sealed at the upper and open at the lower
end. The lower end is inverted in a bowl of mercury,
whose surface is exposed to the air. Variations in the
atmospheric pressure on the mercury surface are
balanced by the column of mercury in the glass tube.
This gives the pressure of the air and can be read off
quickly from the scale on the glass tube. Any liquid
could be used for this purpose, but mercury has been
chosen because it is the heaviest liquid known. If
ordinary water were used, the corresponding column
for normal atmospheric pressure would be 10 metres
(34 feet)! At sea-ievel, the mercury column is
760 mm (29.9 inches). If the pressure increases, the
air pressing on the surface will force up the mercury
column to about 790 mm (31 inches) (high pressure).
When the pressure decreases, as less air presses on
the surface,.the mercury column will drop about
700 mm (28 inches) (low pressure). As pressure is a
force, it is more appropriate to measure it in terms
E
E
:
G
'6
.?_ 12
.E 11
eto
EsI
a very wet year
1 270
1 016
mean annual rainfall
a very dry year
ll6

Barome ter
reading Atmospheric pressure at places A, I and C
km /Mites
a/5
38'l mm ('15 l
Sga mm t23"1
762 mm {3O"
Fig. 13.5 Pressure decreases with increasing altitude
of a unit of force. A new unit known as the millibar
(mb) was adopted by meteorological stations in
1914. A normal atmospheric pressure equivalent to
1.03 kg per cm2 (14.7 lb. per square inch) in weight
or a reading of.760 mm (29.9 inches) of mercury in
the column is 1 013 millibars. On maps, places of
equal pressure are joined by lines called isobars. In
temperate latitudes, pressure changes are very rapid
in the formation of cyclones and anticyclones. In
normal circumstances, they vary from 960 mb to
1 040 mb.
Pressure readings vary with a number of factors.
A sea-level reading 76 cm (29.9 inches) will be
halved on mountainous regions at 5.6 km (3.5 milds)
above sea-level. This is because as one ascends there
is less air above and so the weight, or pressure is less
(Fig. 13.5). The barometer is also sensitive to gravi-
tational forces at different latitudes. The mercury
itself also expands with an increase in temperature.
Therefore for professional meteorological work
which requires very accurate readings, corrections
have to be made in respect to altitude, latitude and
temperature.
Since a mercury barometer that dips in liquid mer-
cury is inconvenient for outdoor measurement, a
more portable but less accurate type known as the
aneroid barometer is used. This comprises a small
metal container, with most of the air driven out to
form almost a vacuum. As there is practically no pres-
sure at all inside the box, any increase in pressure
on the outside of the box will cause the lid to move
inwards thus registering high pressure by an indica-
tor on the revolving dial. When there is a decrease
in pressure, the lid springs outwards, registering low
pressure by the indicator (Fig. 13.6).
In aeroplanes, a modified type of aneroid bar-
ometer called an altimeter is used. As pressure
decreases with altitude at an approximate rate of
Fig. 13.6 An aneroid barometer
25.4 mm (1 inch) drop in the mercury reading for
every 270 metres (900 feet) ascent, the altimeter
gives the reading in metres for height attained
instead of millibars or millimetres. With this, the
pilot will be able to tell the altitude of the plane
above sea-level. For a continuous record ofpressure
changes, as is sometimes required, the self-recording
barogram is used.
3. Temperature. Temperature is a very important
element of climate and weather. The instrument for
measuring temperature is the thermometer which is
a narrow glass tube filled with mercury or alcohol.
It works on the principle that mercury expands when
heated and contracts when cooled. On thermome-
ters, temperatures are marked in one or two ways.
For most scientific purposes, the Centigrade "C is
preferred. Its freezing-point is 0 oC and its boiling-
point is 100'C. In'F (Fahrenheit) the freezing-point
is 32 "F and the boiling-point is 212 "F. The mean
daily temperature of Malaysia is 26.7 "C or 80 oF. For
rapid conversion of one scale into another, the
following formulae may be used.
To obtain Centigrade : (oF - 32) + 1.8
e.g. to convert 59 oF into Centigrade:
(59-32"\ + L.8: Z7 + 1.8:15 oC.
To obtain Fahrenheit : (1.9 x "c) + 32 "F
e.g. to convert 20'C into Fahrenheit:
(1.8 x 20'C) + 32"F: 36o + 32" -- 68'F.
As the degree of 'hotness' varies tremendously
from one place to another, the siting of the instru-
ment is very important. A temperature taken in
open daylight is very high, because it measures the
direct insolation of the sun. It is better described as
'temperature in the sun'. For agricultural purposes,
rt7

air space
I oouute
I louvorod
| 
''o*
I
ftu^ tto"t
aig mm (t6%")
Air enters
Air leaves
Fig. 13.7 A Stevenson Screen
earth temperatures are taken at various depths in the
ground. The thermometer is enclosed in a special
glass tube and the bulb is embedded in paraffin wax,
so that they are less sensitive to abrupt temperature
changes. To assess the possible damages done by
ground frosts to crops in temperate latitudes, grass
temperatures are also taken.
But the temperatures that we are so accustomed
to in climatic graphs are shade temperatures, that is
the temperatures of the air. Precautions therefore
must be taken to exclude the intensity of the sun's
radiant heat. This is done by placing the thermo-
meters in a standard meteorological shelter known
as the Steve.nson Screen (Fig. 13.7). It consists of a
white wooden box raised 1.2 metres (4 feet) above
the ground on stilts. The roof is double-layered ivith
an intervening air space to exclude much of the
direct rays of the sun. The sides of the box are lou-
vered like 'venetian blinds' to allow free circulation
of the air. One side of the screen is hinged to serve
as a door which can be opened and closed to give
access to the instruments kept inside. The floor of
the screen is also louvered. The Stevenson Screen
normally carries maximum and minimum thermom-
eters, dry and wet bulb thermometers. Larger ones
may also contain a self-recording thermogram and
hygrogram.
Maximum and minimum temperatures are meas-
ured by the maximum and minimum thermometers.
They are either in the form of separate thermome-
ters or joined in a U-shaped glass tube as in the Six's
+254mm 
(
thermometer. The maximum thermometer records
the highest temperature reached during the day. The
mercury in the closed glass tube expands when the
temperature rises. It pushes a metal indicator up the
tube and this stays at the maximum level when the
temperature drops. The end of the indicator nearest
the mercury, as indicated in Fig. 13.8, gives the
reading of the maximum temperature,. which is 31 "C
(87 "F.) in this case. To reset the mercury for the next
day's reading, swing it hard or draw the indicator
back by a magnet.
The minimum thermometer records the lowest
Fig. 13.8 Maximum and minimum thermometers
mrnrmum 
maximum
"c l'F. 
"c | "F.
+ 
Bulb
-18 
'l
101-12
nt-7
w-1
qt4
50/1 0
70t21
&t21
g/32
1@/38
1 l0/43
40t4
g)/-l
20/-
tot-t2
23'C t73'F
ot-

RAINFALL
7.30 a.m.
TEMPERATURE
RELATIVE HUMIDITY
WINDS
CLOUDS
REMARKS
Date
in /mm
Mar
b/or
Min
b/or
Mean
'.cloF TP;
Drv
'cl"t
Wet
b/or
o'J8?'."J:'
%
Direction
Speed
Type3
Cover
A Summary of
general weather
I
(Beaufort Scalel
cono|llons
I
0'3218
t t/o
Ill tl
zuov
12120
3t5
909(
s.w.
\l-_
Cirrus
o
)lear sky, light mist
Drll
r8
28n
Total
Vlean
Name of School/Station:
LOCAL WEATHE R OBSERVATION
WEATHE R RECORDI NG SHEET
Month:
- 
Year
Time of reading:
Summary for the month
1. Highest maximum
2. Lowest minimum
3. Lowest maximum
4. Highest minimum
5. Graatest rainfall in 24 hours
6. Number of raindays for the month
7. Any other special remarks
Notes
(al Maximum thermometer readings at 7.30 a.m. to b€ entered
to previous days.
(bl Minimum thermometer readings at 7,30 Lm, to be entered
to current day,
Fig. 13.9 A specimen copy of the Weather Recording
Sh€et 6 kept in school weather stations
Rainfall read at 7.30 a,m. to be entered to previous day.
Relatiw humidity read at 7.30 a.m. to be €ntered to current
day.
Day of reading is the 12 day. Temperature readings in dark-
ened boxes are taken on the 13 day to get diurnal range of
temp€rature.
on
on
on
on
(cl
(dt
Jf
t19

temperature reached during the day; it probably
occurs in the middle of the night or early in the
morning. The glass tube is filled with alcohol which
allows the indicator to slide freely along the tube.
When the temperature drops, the alcohol contracts
and drags the indicator towards the bulb by the sur-
face tension of the indicator. When the temDerature
rises, the alcohol flows past the indicator leaving it
where it was. The end of the indicator farthest from
the bulb gives the reading of the minimum temper-
ature, which is 23"C (73"F ) in Fig. 13.8. The
thermometer is then reset by a magnet for the next
24 hours' reading.
In recording temperature, the maximum temper-
ature is entered in the column for the previous day
and the minimum temperature in the column for
current day because of their respective period of
probable occurrence as shown in a specimen copy of
the Weather Recording Sheet (Fig. 13.9). The mean
daily temperature is the average of maximum and
minimum, e.g. (33 "C + 2I"C) + 2:27 "C or 90'F
+ 70 "F + 2:80'F. But an accurate mean should
be the average of 24 readings taken at hourly inter-
vals during the whole day. In practice this is almost
impossible except with a self-recording instrument.
The difference between the maximum and minimum
temperatures of a day gives the diurnal range of tem-
perature. The difference between the hottest month
(i.e. July in the northern hemisphere) and the cold-
est month (i.e. January in the northern hemisphere)
gives the annual range of temperature.
In diagrammatic representations, monthly mean
temperatures are shown in simple temperature
graphs (Fig. 13.10) or in temperature distribution
maps as isotherms. For these maps temperatures are
reduced to sea-level-that is, shown as if the recording
station were at sea-level. Temperatures decrease at
the rate of 1 "C for 165 metres (L 'F for 300 feet)
ascent in altitude, so for highland stations a higher
temperature is shown than was actually recorded.
4. Humidity. Humidity is a measure of the damp-
ness of the atmosphere which varies greatly from
place to place at different times of day. The actual
amount of water vapour present in the air, whiCh is
expressed in gram per cubic metre, is called the
absolute humidity. But more important from the
point of view of weather studies is the relative
humidity. This is the ratio between the actual
amount of water vapour and the total amount the
air can hold at a given temperature, expressed as a
percentage. Warm air can hold more water vapour
than cold air, so if it contains only half the amount
MJ 
J
months
ND
J 
F 
M A M J J A SO N D 
Range
"c -13 -10 r a rc 22 2s 24 16 g -2 -1o 3g"C
oF. 8 14 30 47 60 71 77 7s 61 48 29 14 69oF.
Statistical data of temperature of Shenyang (Mukoen)
Mean annual temperature is 6.6"C (44oF.)
Fig. 13.10 A temperature graph of Shenyang (Mukden)
(Mean monthly temperatures from January to December)
it could carry, the relative humidity is 50 per cent.
In the equatorial regions, over 80 per cent is com-
mon in the morning, which means the air contains
four-fifths as much water vapour as it can carry.
When the relative humidity reaches 100 per cent, the
air is completely saturated. The air temperature is
said to be at dew-point. Further cooling will con-
dense the water vapour into clouds or rain. It is thus
clear that when relative humidity is high the air is
moist, as in the equatorial regions; when it is low,
the air is dry as in the deserts.
The instrument for measuring relative humidity is
the hygrometer, which comprises wet- and dry-bulb
thermometers placed side by side in the Stevenson
Screen (Fig. 13.11). The dry-bulb is, in fact, the
ordinary thermometer that measures the shade tem-
perature mentioned earlier. The wet-bulb is kept
wet by a wick that dips into a reservoir of distilled
water. When the air is not saturated, evaporation
which produces a cooling effect, takes place from the
moist wick. The wet-bulb therefore always shows a
lower reading than the dry-bulb. With reference to
Fig. 13.11 The hygrometer consisting of wet and dry bulb
thermometers
21 oO
16 .g
o
10i
G
4f,
-lE
o
-7
-12
-18
l.L
o
o
E.
Eo
r20
Mercurv in stenl
DRY BULB

Rotates freelY
poinls into the
Fig. 13.12 Wind vanes
prepared tables for calculating relative humidity.
under the difference column of dry- and wet-bulb
reading, the relative humidity can be obtained as a
percentage. Normally a large difference indicates a
low R.H. and a small difference a high R.H. If both
have the same reading, R.H. is 100 per cent; the air
is saturated.
5. Winds. Wind is air in motion and has both direc-
tion and speed. Unlike other elements in climate
such as rain, snow or sleet, winds are made up of a
series of gusts and eddies that can only be fett but
not seen. When leaves fall, trees sway and dust par-
ticles move, we realize that the wind is blowing. But
there is nothing tangible that we can show or meas-
ure unless we make use of some conventional instru-
ments.
The instrument widely used for measuring wind
direction is a wind vane or weather cock. As wind
direction is always deflected by trees and tall build-
ings, weather cocks and wind vanes need to be
erected in an exposed position, to get a true direc-
tion. It is made up of two parts as shown in
Fig. I3.12(a) and (b). One part is an arrow or vane
on the top, which is free to move with the prevailing
wind. The other part with the four compass points
is stationary and shows in which direction the wind
is moving. Winds are always named from the direc-
tion they blow; an east wind is one that blows from
east to west and a south-west wind is one that blows
from the south-west.
Most of the weather cocks that we see on church
spires and country buildings seldom give a correct
indication of wind direction. They are either too low
or are blocked by taller structures nearby. The direc-
tion of smoke-drift or flag movements in fairly open
spaces provides the most reliable indication of wind
direction. Sometimes a piece of woven-cloth with a
tail is fixed to the top of a high pole and drifts freely
in mid-air. This is another way of indicating wind
direction.
A wind rose is used for recording the direction of
prevailing winds of a place over a period of a month.
It consists of an octagon with the eight compass
points. Each of the small rectangles represents the
date in which the wind comes from that direction
(e.g. on the fourth of the month, the wind is'north-
east). Those days which are without any wind is
recorded in the box of the calms, and the number of
calm days are indicated in the centre of the octagon,
e.g. 3 days in that month (Fig. 13.13).
The speed of wind is usually measured by an ane-
mometer (Fig. 13.1a). It consists of three or four
semi-circular cups attached to the ends of horizontal
spokes mounted on a high vertical spindle. As the
concave sides of the cups offer greater resistance to
Fig. 13.13 A wind rose
t2l

strength of winds. The best guide is obtainable from
the Beaufort Wind Scale which was devised by
Admiral Beaufort in 1805 for estimating wind speed.
Frequent reference to the table in your free time will
help you to learn it quickly.
6. Sunshine. As mentioned in Chapter l, the
amount of sunshine a place receives depends on the
seasons, a factor determined by latitude and by the
position of the earth in its revolution around the sun.
Tourist resorts, particularly in the higher temperate
Fig. 13.'14 Simplified sketch to illustrate the main features
of a wind anemometer
the winds, the horizontal spokes will rotate, moving
a central rod which transmits the velocity (speed) of
the wind in kilometres per hour to an electrically
operated dial. But the speed recorded is not abso-
lutely accurate because after the winds have abated,
the rotaton continues due to its own momentum.
With some modifications, the anemometer can also
record wind directions.
Since an anemometer is not easily available, a lit-
tle practice of local wind observations will help us
to assess the speed of winds. By seeing the way some
objects move, a great deal can be said about the
The Beaufort Wind Scale
Beaufort 
Arrow
Scale No. 
Indication
Wind
Description
Calm
Light air
Slight Breeze
Gentle Breeze
Moderate
Breeze
Fresh Breeze
Strong Breeze
Moderate
Gale
Fresh Gale
Effects
(a guide to observation)
Smoke rises vertically
Wind direction shown by smoke-drift
but not by wind-vanes
Wind felt on face: leaves rustle: vanes
moved by wind
Leaves and twigs in constant motion;
winds extend light flags
Raises dust and loose paper; small
branches moved
Small trees in leaf begin to sway;crested
wavelets form on inland water
Large branches in motion; whistling
heard in telegraph wires .
Whole tree in motion; walking incon-
venienced
Twigs broken off trees; progress generally
impeded
o
t--------.
t-----.
\_
\.----_
\\\_
\\\_
\\,_-
\\\_
Speed
Km/h (mph)
Less than 1.6 (1)
1.6-s (1-3)
7-1.r (4-7)
13-1e (8-12)
2r-29 (13-18)
3r-3e (Le-24)
41-s0 (2s-3r)
s1-61 (32-38)
63-74 (39-46)
Fig. 13.15 A sunshine recorder

\\\,_
\\\\__
\\\\\
u\\\r__
\\\L-
l0
il
t2
Strong Gale
Whole Gale
Storm
Hurricane
More than
r20 (7s)
75-86 (47 -54) Slight structural damage occurs, chimney
pots removed
88-101 (55-63) Considerable structural damage, trees
uprooted
103-120 (64-75) Widespread damage. very rarely ex-
perienced
Widespread devastation, experienced
only in tropical areas
but not when the rays are faint. On maps, places
with equal sunshine duration are joined by isohels.
Fig. 13.15 shows a sunshine recorder.
7. Clouds. When air rises, it is cooled by expansion.
After dew-point has been reached, cooling leads to
condensation of water vapour in the atmosphere.
Tiny droplets of water vapour which are too small
to fall as rain or snow (less than 0.01 mm, approx-
imately 0.0005 inches in radius) will be suspended
in the air and float as clouds. Their form, shape,
Fig. 13.17 A synoptic chart showing anticyclonic conditions
in Europe
Fig. 13.16 A synoptic chart showing cyclonic conditions in
Eu rope
latitudes, are most concerned about the numbers of
hours of sunshine they receive. In the tropics, where
sunshine is abundant, people are less interested in the
amount.
In the meteorological station, sunshine duration
is recorded by a sun-dial, I02 mm (4 inches) in
diameter, through which the sun's rays are focused
upon a sensitized card, graduated in hours. A line
is made on the card when it is sufficiently heated,
-\i\,fs1m 
front
sCold 
front
4Occlusion

height and movemenls tell us a great deal about the
sky conditions and the weather we are likely to
experience. It is fascinating and very rewarding to
know something about the clouds which we see
every day. For meteorological purposes, the amount
of cloud-cover in the sky is expressed in eights or
oktas (e.g. f O is quarter covered;f O is half cov-
eredl fO is three-quarters obscured andf O is com-
pletely overcast). They are shown on weather maps
by discs, shaded in the correct proportions. De-
tails of cloud type are indicated in code figures
which have been internationally accepted. On maps
places with an equal degree of cloudiness are joined
by lines known as isonephs. As clouds vary so
quickly from time to time at any particular place,
isoneph maps have little significance.
The classification of clouds is based on a combi-
nation of form, height and appearance. Four major
cloud types and their variations can be recognized.
(a) High clou"ds: mainly cirrus (Ci) of feathery
form at 6100-12 200 metres (20,000-40,000 feet)
above ground.
i Cirrus (Ci). This looks fibrous and appears like
wisps in the blue sky; it is often called 'mares' tails'.
It indicates fair weather, and often gives a brilliant
sunset (Plate 13.A).
ii. Cirrocumulus (Cc). This appears as white glob-
ular masses, forming ripples in a 'mackerel sky'
(Plate 13.B).
13.A Cirrus cloud Royal Netherlands Meteorological lnstitute
iii. Cirrostratus (Cs). This resembles a thin white
sheet or veil; the sky looks milky and the sun or
moon shines through it with a characteristic 'halo'
(Plate 13.C).
(b) Medium clouds: mainly alto (Alt) or middle
height clouds at 2 100-6 000 metres (7,000-20,000
feet)
iv. Altocumulus (Alt-Cu). These are woolly,
bumpy clouds arranged in layers and appearing like
waves in the blue sky. They normally indicate fine
weather (Plate 13.D).
v. Altostratus (Alt-St). These are denser, greyish
clouds with a'watery' look. They have a fibrous or
striated structure through which the sun's rays shine
faintly.
(c) Low clouds: mainly stratus or sheet clouds
below 2 100 metres (7,000 feet).
vi. Stratocumulus (St-Cu). This is a rough, bumpy
cloud with the waves more pronounced than in alto-
cumulus. There is great contrast between the bright
and shaded parts.
vii. Stratus (St). This is a very low cloud, uniformly
grey and thick, which appears like a low ceiling or
highfand fog. It brings dull weather with light dizzle.
It reduces the visibility of aircraft and is thus a dan-
ger.
viii. Nimbostratus (Ni-St). This is a dark, dull
cloud, clearly layered, and is also known as a'rain
cloud'. It brings continuous rain, snow or sleet.
r-}tt
-'ffiffi
|*ttf*ii..***i

13.8 Cirrocr:mulus cloud Meteorologie National Paris
(d) Clouds with great vertical extenti mainly
cumulus or heap clouds with no definite height
(6 100-9 000 metres/20,000-30,000 feet).
ix. Cumulus (Cu). This is a vertical cloud with a
rounded top and horizontal base, typical of humid
tropical regions, associated with up-rising convec-
tional currents. Its great white globular masses may
look grey against the sun but it is a 'fair weather
Fig. 13.18 Fogs formed over Newfoundland by ocean cur-
rents
cloud'(Plate 13.E).
x. Cumulonimbus (Cu-Ni). Thisis, infact, an over-
grown cumulus cloud, extdnding for a tremendous
vertical height from a base of 600 metres (2,000
feet) to over 9 000 metres (30,000 feet). Its black and
white globular masses take a fantastic range
of shapes. Its cauliflower top often spreads out like
an anvil. This is frequently seen in tropical after-
Fig. 13.19 Fogs formed in Peruvian Coast by current and
hot air
r25

13.C Cirrostratus with scattered cumulus Meteorologie
National Paris
noons. It is also referred to as a 'thunder-cloud'and
brings convectional rain, accompanied by lightning
and thunder (Plate 13.F).
8. Other elements pertaining to visibility. Other ele-
ments affecting visibility include haze, mist and fog.
(a) Haze. This is caused by smoke and dust par-
l3.D Altocumulus cloud Royal Netherlands Metearological lnstitute
ticles in industrial areas or may be due to unequal
refraction of light in air of different densities in the
lower atmosphere. The term is usually used in con-
nection with the reduction of visibility in regions of
lower humidity,.less than 75 per cent. When visibility
is less than 2 km (1* miles) haze is present.
,.it
t-Y

13.E Cumulus cloud J. Mondaine
13.F Cumulonimbus cloud Royal Netherlands Meteorologic-
al lnstitute

(b) Mist. The condensation of water vapour in the
air causes small droplets of water to float about
forming clouds at ground level called mist. It reduces
visibility to about 1000 metres or 1,100 yards.
Unlike haze, mist occurs in wet air, when the rela-
tive humidity is over 75 per cent.
(c) Fog. Ordinary fog is due to water condensing
on dust and other particles like smoke from houses
and tactories. It only occurs in the lower strata of
the atmosphere as a sort of dense'ground cloud'.
The visibility in fog is even less than 1 000 metres.
In industrial areas, like those of the Black Country
and northern England very thick smoky fog, called
smog is formed. The visibility may be reduced to 200
metres (220 yards) or even less.
Fogs that occur on hills are called hill fogs. They
are most common in the morning, even in the trop-
ics, and disperse when the sun rises. In temperate
lands, when days are hot and nights are clear and
Ouestions and Exercises
1. (a) What instruments are normally kept in the
school weather station?
(b) Why is it important that the times of obser-
vation and the method of recording should
be uniform?
(c) Explain what precautions you would take to
ensure that your observations and records
from the various instruments are accurate.
2. Name the instruments you would use to measure
the following elements of weather.
(a) relative humidity;
(b) atmospheric pressure;
(c) wind velocity.
For any two of. the above, and with annotated
diagrams, explain how the instruments work.
3. What weather elements are measured by the fol-
lowing apparatus?
(a) rain-gauge;
(b) the Six's maximum and minimum thermom-
eters:
still, fogs may also result from cooling of the land
surface by radiation. The lower layers of the air are
chilled and water vapour in the atmosphere conden-
ses to form radiation fog, or land fog. When the
cooling surface is over the sea or when a warm ocean
current is brought into contact with a cold current
as off Newfoundland, sea fog is formed (Fig. 13.15).
It varies in depth and thickness. Some sea fogs are
so shallow and light that the masts of ships can be
seen protruding above them.
Fogs are also formed when cold ocean currents
come into contact with hot desert air as off the Ata-
cama Desert of Peru and Chile (Fig. 13.16).
Generally speaking, fogs are more common over
seas than lands, and are most prevalent over coastal
areas. The dry interiors experience haze or mist.
Dense fogs are more likely to occur in the high and
middle latitudes rather than in the tropics.
(c) a wind vane.
Describe how the above apparatus function and
state what special precautions must be taken
when taking readings from them.
Either: Explain the following:
(a) Wind speed at 760 metres (2,500 feet) is
greater than that at the surface.
(b) Britain has no climate, only weather.
(c) Fog is, in fact, cloud at ground level.
Or: Distinguish between:
(a) mist and fog;
(b) cirrus and stratus clouds;
(c) climate and weather.
Define any three of the following terms or
phrases, in their relation to weather studies:
(a) mean annual rainfall;
(b) diurnal range of temperature;
(c) Beaufort Scale;
(d) synoptic charts;
(e) isotherms.
4.
5.
r28

Sample Objective Ouestions
1. Which of the following is /acsr
affected by conditions of local weath-
er2
A a geographical outing
B an airport ground control station
C military operations in 
the
Mekong Basin
D a chess tournament
2. Evaporation is the process by which
A hot air rises
B cooling takes place
C air becomes saturated
D a substance changes from liquid
to vapour
3. Pick orrt the incorrec, statement ab-
out weather and climate.
A The climate of temperate lati-
tudes is more variable than that
of the tropics
B Fogs are most commonly seen at
noon when the heat is greatest
C Pressure decreases with increas-
ing altitude
D When relative humidity is high,
the air is moist
4. The amount of heat received in any
part of the earth's surface is deter-
miged mainly by its
A latitude
B longitude
C relief
D distance from the sea
5. The Stevenson Screen is usually
painted white to
A absorb maximum incoming solar
energy
B reflect as much heat as possible
C allow free circulation of air
D look attractive
6. The Centigrade equivalent of 77"F.
is
A 15"C
B 20"C
c 25'C
D 30"C
7. The winter temperature of Montreal
(Canada) is much lower than that of
London (England) although they are
located in almost the same latitudin-
al zones because
A Montreal receives Westerlies in
winter
B its coast is bathed bv the cold
Labrador Current
C the Gulf Stream brings cold water
in to the St.'Lawrence estuary
D it has a continental location
8. Land and sea breezes are basically
caused by
A differential heating between land
and sea
B temperature variations in summer
and winter
C the convergence ofwarm and cold
currents
D differences in the physical reliefof
the earth
9. The velocity of the wind is measured
by
A a wind vane
B a hygrometer
C an anemometer
D a barogram
10. Which of the following are consi-
dered impropel as regards the posi-
tion of the school weather station
and the recording of daily readings?
I The school weather station is sited
next to the Geography Room
II The rain gauge stands on the ground
surface
III The wind vane is erected on the roof
of the Stevenson Screen
IV Maximum thermometer readings at
7.30 a.m. are entered in the column
of the previous day in the Weather
Recording Sheet
V Relative humidity reading at 7.30
a.m. is entered in the column of the
current day in the Weather Record-
ing Sheet
A IandIV
B I, II and III
C II, III and V
D I. II. IV and V
t29

