Chapter 9 Lakes
General
Lakes are amongst the most varied features of the
earth's surface. They occupy the hollows of the land
surface in which water accumulates. They vary tre-
mendously in size, shape, depth and mode of for-
mation. The tiny ones are no bigger than ponds or
pools, but the large ones are so extensive that they
merit the name of seas, e.g. the Caspian Sea which
is | 223 km (760 miles) long, as much as 980 metres
(3,2I5 feet) deep, with a total area of 373 230 sq km
(143,550 square miles) and is bigger than the whole
of Malaysia!
Lakes may exist temporarily filling up the small
depressions of undulating ground after a heavy
shower. But those which are deep and carry more
water than could ever be evaporated remain per-
manent. Most of the lakes in the world are fresh-
water lakes fed by rivers and with out-flowing
streams, e.g. Lake Geneva, Lake Poyang and the
Great Lakes of North America. In regions of low
precipitation and intense evaporation where there
are few rivers strong enough to reach the sea,
streams drain into a lake forming a basin of inland
drainage. Because of the intense evaporation these
lakes are saline. For example the Dead Sea has a
salinity (salt content) of 250 parts per thousand, and
the Great Salt Lake of Utah, U.S.A. has a salinity
of 220 parts per thousand. But, the Black Sea, into
which drain manv larse rivers. has a salinitv of less
Fig. 9.1 Earth movement
rift valley lakes
than 17 parts per thousand! Playas or salt lakes, are
a common feature of deserts.
It must be pointed out that lakes are only tem-
porary features of the earth's crust; they will even-
tually be eliminated by the double process of
draining and silting up. In regions of unreliable rain-
fall, lakes dry up completely during the dry season.
In the hot deserts lakes disappear altogether by
the combined processes of evaporation, percolation
and outflow. Though the process of lake elimination
may not be completed within our span of life,
it takes place relatively ,quickly in terms of geologi-
cal time.
The Formation and Origin of Lakes
The following are the various ways in which lakes
can be formed. Each of them is placed in a specific
category, though in a few cases the lakes could have
been formed by more than one single factor.
LAKES FORMED BY EARTH MOVEMENT
l. Tectonic lakes. Due to the warping, sagging,
bending and fracturing of the earth's crust, tectonic
depressions occur. Such depressions give rise to
lakes of immense sizes and depths. They include
Lake Titicaca, occupying a huge depression in
the intermont plateau of the Andes, 3 810 metres
(12,500 feet) above sea-level, the highest lake in the
world; and the Caspian Sea, the largest lake, almost
5 times larger than its nearest rival, Lake Superior.
2. Rift valley lakes. Due to faulting, a rift valley
is formed by the sinking of land between two parallel
faults, deep, narrow and elongated in character.
Water collects in these troughs and their floors are
often below sea-level. The best known example is
the East African Rift Valley which runs through
Zambia, Malawi, Tanzania, Kenya and Ethiopia,
and extends along the Red Sea to Israel and Jordan
over a total distance of 4 800 km (3,000 miles).
It includes such lakes as Lakes Tanganyika
(1 430 m/4,7W feet deep, the world's deepest lake),
Malawi, Rudolf, Edward, Albert, as well as the
Dead Sea 392 metres (1,286 feet) below mean sea-
level, the world's lowest lake (Fig. 9.1).
Fig. 9.1 Earth movement

r$
.T
rtr
9.A Blea Water in Westmorland, England, a typical corrie
lake J.K. St. Joseph
LAKES FORMED BY GLACIATION
1. Cirque lakes or tarns. A glacier on its way
down the valley leaves behind circular hollows in the
heads of the valleys up in the mountains. Such hol-
lows are the armchair-shaped cirques or corries
(Plate 9.A). Their over-deepened floors may be
filled with water to become cirque lakes, e.g. Red
Tarn in the English Lake District (Fig. 9.2). Those
that occupy glacial troughs are long and deep and a
are termed ribbon lakes, e.g. Lake Ullswater.
2. Kettle lakes. These are depressions in the out-
wash plain left by the melting of masses of stagnant
ice. They are irregular because of the uneven
morainic surface and are never of any great size or
depth, e.g. the meres of Shropshire in England, and
the kettle-lakes of Orkney in Scotland.
3. Rock-hollow lakes. These are formed by ice-
scouring when valley glaciers or ice sheets scoop out
hollows on the surface. Such lakes of glacial origin
are abundant in Finland. In fact. the Finns call their
country Suomi-the Land of Lakes. It is said that
there are over 35 000 glacial lakes in Finland (Plate
e.B)!
4. Lakes due to morainic damming of valleys.
Valley glaciers often deposit morainic debris across
Fig. 9.2 Lakes formed through glaciation

9.8 Some of the lakes of Finland scoured out by ice action
Camera Press
a valley so that lakes are formed when water
accumulates behind the barrier. Both lateral and
terminal moraines are capable of damming valleys,
e.g. Lake Windermere of the Lake District, Eng-
land.
5. Lakes due to the deposition of glacial drifts. In
glaciated lowlands with a predominant drumlin land-
scape, where drainage is poor, there are intervening
depressions. These depressions are' often water-
logged, forming small lakes like those of Countv
Downs in Northern Ireland.
LAKES FORMED BY VOLCANIC ACTIVITY
l. Crater and caldera lakes. During a volcanic
explosion the top of the cone may be blown off leav-
ing behind a natural hollow called a crater. This may
be enlarged by subsidence into a caldera. These
depressions are normally dry, bounded by steep
Fig. 9.3 Lake formed through volcanic activity
9.C Lake Toba, a crater lake is a scenic spot that attracts
many tourists,
ciiffs and roughly circular in shape. In dormant or
extinct volcanoes, rain falls straight into the crater
or caldera which has no superficial outlet and forms
a crater or caldera lake. The outstanding ones are
the Crater Lake in Oregon, U.S.A. which in fact
occupies a caldera; Lake Toba in northern Sumatra
(Plate 9.C) and Lake Avernus near Naples (Fig.
e.3).
2. Lava-blocked lakes. In volcanic regions a
stream of lava may flow across a valley, become
solidified and thus dam the river forming a lake, e.g.
a lava flow blocks the Jordan valley forming the Sea
of Galilee which is an inland lake, rather elongated
in shape (Fig. 9.a).
3. Lakes due to subsidence of a volcanic land sur-
face. The crust of a hollow lava flow may collapse.
The subsidence leaves behind a wide and shallow
depression in which a lake may form, e.g. Myvatn
of lceland.
Fig. 9.4 Lava-blocked lake
,/ 
* 
't]t

no sur{ace
Fig. 9.5 A karst lake formed above the groundwater-table
in a limestone regions
LAKES FORMED BY EROSION
1. Karst lakes. The solvent action of rain-water
on limestone carves out solution hollows. When
these become clogged with debris lakes may form in
them. The collapse of limestone roofs of under-
ground caverns may result in the exposure of long,
narrow lakes that were once underground, e.g. the
Lac de Chaillexon in the Jura Mountains.
The large depressions called po[ies, which nor-
mally do not have surface outlets, may contain lakes.
During wet periods these may cover most of the
polje floor but they shrink during dry periods due to
seepage (Fig. 9.5). An example is Lake Scutari in
Yugoslavia.
Solution is important in other rocks such as rock
salt. Local subsidence may occur when the under-
lying beds of rock salt are gradually removed in
solution. Many of the meres of Cheshire, England,
were probably caused by this, and are also the result
of salt-mining operations.
2. Wind-deflated lakes. The deflating action of
winds in deserts creates hollows. These may reach
groundwater which seeps out forming small, shallow
lakes. Excessive evaporation causes these to become
salt lakes and playas. These are found in the Qattara
Depression in Egypt, and the Great Basin of Utah,
U.S.A. (Fig. e.6).
LAKES FORMED BY DEPOSMON
1. Lakes due to river deposits. A river may
shorten its course during a flood by cutting across its
meandering loops, leaving behind a horseshoe-
shaped channel as an ox-bow lake, e.g. those that
Fig. 9.6 Wind-deflated lake
occur on the flood-plains of Lower Mississippi,
U.S.A. and Rio Grande Mexico.
2. Lakes due to marine deposits. The action of
winds and waves may isolate lagoons along coasts by
building spits or bars. As these lagoons of shallow
water are enclosed only by a narrow spit of land,
comprising mud, sand and shingle, they may drain
away at low tide. They are commonly found off the
deltas of large rivers such as the Nile and the
Ganges. In East Germany and Poland, lagoons are
called haffs. Strong on-shore winds are capable of
pushing coastal sand d.unes landwards, and these
may enclose marshy lagoons. This type of lagoon is
well developed in the Landes of south-west France.
3. Lakes due to landslides. screes and ava-
lanches. Lakes formed by these processes are also
known as barrier lakes. Landslides or screes may
block valleys so that rivers are dammed. Such lakes
are short-lived, because the loose fragments that pile
across the valleys will soon give way under the pres-
Fig. 9.7 Deposition (a barrier lake formed by the deposition
of an obstacle)
Sand dunes

9.D Lake Mead, an artificial lake formed by the construction
of the Hoover Dam in Nevada Servizio Editoriale Fotografico
sure of water. When they suddenly give way, the
dammed water rushes down, causing floods. Exam-
ples of lakes of this type are, Lake Gormire in York-
shire, blocked by landslides; Ffynnon Frech on
Snowdon blocked by screes (Fig. 9.7).
LAKES FORMED BY HUMAN AND BIOLOGICAL ACTIVITIES
1. Man-made lakes. Besides the natural lakes,
Man has now created artificial lakes by erecting a
concrete dam across a river valley so that the river
water can be kept back to form reservoirs (Fig. 9.8).
Amongst such man-made lakes, the most imposing
is Lake Mead above the Hoover Dam on the
Colorado River, U.S.A. (Plate 9.D).
2. Lakes made by animals. Animals like beavers
are particularly interesting. They live in communi-
ties and construct dams across the rivers with timber.
Such beaver dams are quite permanent and are
found in North America, e.g. Beaver Lake in
Yellowstone National Park, U.S.A.
3. Other types of lake. These include ornamental
lakes, especially made to attract tourists, e.g. Lake
Gardens in Kuala Lumpur and Taiping Lakes. Man's
mining activities, e.g. tin mining in Peninsular
Fig. 9.8 Human activities (a lake made by constructing a
concrete dam across a river valley)
Malaysia, have created numerous lakes. Inland fish
culture has necessitated the creation of.many fishing-
lakes.
Lakes and Man
A careful examination of the lakes of the world will
reveal their immense human significance. In coun-
tries where they are found in abundance, such as
Finland,, Canada, U.S.A., Sweden and the East
African states, lakes, together with other inland
waterways, have played a dominant role in the
human, economic, social and cultural life of the peo-
ple. The pattern of settlement, commerce and com-
munication is very closely related to the distribution
of the water features.
The following are the major uses of lakes and their
associated human activities.
l. Means of communication. Large lakes like the
Great Lakes of North America provide a cheap and
convenient form of transport for heavy and bulky
goods such as coal, iron, machinery, grains and tim-
ber. The Great Lakes-St. Lawrence waterways pen-
etrate more than 2 740 km (1,700 miles) into the
interior. They are thus used as the chief arteries of
commerce. It is estimated that the annual tonnage
passing through the Sault-Ste. Marie Canal, or the
Soo Canal, between Lake Huron and Lake Superior
is greater than the combined annual tonnage of the
Suez and Panama Canals.
2. Economic and industrial development. Early set-
tlements and town sites were very much influenced
by the presence of lakes. Lakes are an even more
decisive factor when they are drained by large rivers
with outlets to the sea. The Great Lakes-St. Law-
rence waterways were responsible for the develop-
ment of the interior wheat farms and lakeside
industries. Raw materials, minerals and fuels were
economically handled and assembled in the
' H O M E S' district (Lake f/uron, Ontario, Michigan,
^Erie and Superior), which has since become one of
the greatest industrial districts of the world. Simi-
larly, Lakes Poyang, Dongting (Tung Ting) and the
lakes of the central Chang Jiang (Yangtze) basin
have greatly assisted in the commercial and indus-
trial development of Wuhan (Wuchang, Hanyang
and Hankou (Hankow)).
3. Water storage. Lakes of either natural or artifi-
cial origin are vital sources of domestic water supply
to surrounding towns and industrial cities. For exam-
ple in Britain, Lake Thirlmere supplies water to
Manbhester, Loch Kartrine to Glasgow, Lake

Vyrnwy (in Wales) to Liverpool. The MacRitchie
Reservoir supplies Singapore and the Ayer Itam
Reservoir supplies Penang.
4. Hydro-electric power generation. In mountain-
ous districts, lakes or man-made reservoirs are used
to furnish a good head of water to generate hydro-
electric power. Natural lakes are preferred to arti-
ficial reservoirs because the volume of water that
flows from them varies very little throughout the
year. For instance, the Niagara River flowing from
Lake Erie to Lake Ontario has a very regular supply
of water for its power stations, whereas the Catawba
River in the Carolinas which does not flow from a
lake, has very little water during the dry season.
Cotton mills have been forced to close down during
the period of drought due to insufficient power sup-
plies to run the mills. The Aswan Dam on the Nile
in Egypt and the Lloyd Barrage on the Indus at Suk-
kur suffer from similar defects. The Abu Bakar Dam
of the Cameron Highlands supplies much hydro-
electricity for central Peninsular Malay-sia.
5. Agricultural purposes. As mentioned earlier,
most lakes will eventually be eliminated, and when
they dry up, their former beds are covered with thick
layers of fertile alluvium. They make excellent agri-
cultural land like the fertile Vale of Pickering in
Yorkshire, or the rich Red River Valley of Canada
which was in fact the former site of Lake Agassiz.
Modern multi-purpose dams, besides generating
hydro-electric power also supply water for irriga-
tion, e.g. the Sennar Dam on the Blue Nile in Sudan,
the Burrinjuck Dam on the Murrumbidgee in Aus-
tralia, and the Ghulam Mohammed Barrage on the
Indus in Pakistan.
6. Regulating river flows. A river with large lakes
in its basin seldom experiences serious floods or lack
of water. By absorbing the excess water during
heavy rain, a lake reduces the effects of serious
flooding downstream. In the dry season, it releases
its water so that a steady flow of the river is main-
tained. Because lakes retain part of the sediment
load, rivers leaving lakes have clearer water. Lakes
that have such functions include the Poyang and
Dongting (Tung Ting) on the Chang Jiang (Yangtze
Kiang), Tonle Sap on a tributary of the Mekong, and
Lake Constance on the upper Rhine. Where such
lakes are not available, and flooding is a serious
problem, artificial reservoirs are constructed, e.g.
the Hoover Dam on the River Colorado and the
Bhakra and Nangar Dams on the Sutlej in India.
7. Moderation of climate. Large and deep lakes
which are heated more Slowly than the land by dav
and cooled more slowly than the land by night,
exercise an appreciable effect in moderating the cli-
mate of a regioh in the same way as oceans affect
adjoining land masses. Water in the lakes cools the
air in summer by absorbing part of the heat and
warms it in winter by releasing the heat. For exam-
ple, the eastern shores of Lakes Erie, Ontario and
Huron have a much milder winter than those of the
west, because the on-coming breezes are warmed
and early frosts are minimized. This part of the Lake
Peninsula is therefore important for grapes and fruit
farming. Large lakes like Lake Michigan and the
Caspian Sea,afso exert a slight influence on the cloud-
iness and precipitation of the region. Their large
expanse of water acts almost like part of the ocean,
and helps to precipitate atmospheric moisture into
rain. The leeward side of Lake Michigan records a
little more precipitation than the windward side,
though the actual amount is often not easily notice-
able. Small lakes have practically no effect at all on
either temperature or rainfall.
8. Source of food. Many large lakes have important
supplies of protein food in the form of freshwater
fish. Sturgeon is commercially caught in the Caspian
Sea, salmon and sea trout in the Great Lakes and
in Tonle Sap in Kampuchea, fishing is a leading
occupation. Amateur fishermen have found fishing
in lakes and rivers a most rewarding pastime. In
many countries, artificial lakes have been created for
inland fish breeding. This is particularly important
in China, Japan and Singapore.
9. Source of minerals. Salt lakes provide valuable
rock salts. In the Dead Sea, the highly saline water
is being evaporated and produces common salt,
almost indispensable for human well-being. Borax
is mined in the salt lakes of the Mojave Desert.
Gypsum, mined in Cheshire and Stassfurt, a
short distance from Berlin, is so rich in potash and
other chemical deposits, that they have given rise to
a wide range of chemical industries. In both these
areas, the salts are obtained from deposits formed in
an earlier geological period.
10. Tourist attraction and health resorts. Some of
the world's best frequented holiday and health
resorts are located on lakesides for example, Lake
Geneva, Lake Lucerne, Lake Lugano, Lake Como,
Lake Placid (New York), Lake Vaner and Lake
Vatter (Sweden), the English Lake District and
Taiping Lakes. The glacier-formed lakes of the Alps
have made the tourist industry a national occupation
of the Swiss.

Ouestions and Exercises
1. Locate any three of the following lakes: Lake
Tanganyika, Great Salt Lake, Lake Toba, Lake
Como, Lake Victoria, Lake Scutari, Lake
Mead.
(a) With the aid of sketch maps, explain their
mode of formation;
(b) State their specific value to the countries
thev serve:
(c) Name another lake outside that country
which has fairly similar origins.
2. Explain how each of the following types of lake
are formed. Quote an example of each and
locate them in clear sketch maps:
(a) ox-bow lake;
(b) kettle lake;
(c) crater lake;
(d) karst lake.
3. (a) With the help of large, labelled diagrams,
explain how lakes may be formed by any
three of the following:
i. glaciation;
ii. earth movement;
iii. volcanic activitv:
iv. erosion;
v. deposition.
(b) Quote three actual examples of each.
(c) State three uses of man-made lakes.
4. Rivers may be dammed for:
(a) generating hydro-electricity;
(b) controlling floods;
(c) irrigating crops;
(d) supplying drinking water;
(e) assisting inland water transport.
Sample Objective Ouestions
1. Glaciation in temperate regions has
given rise to many kinds of lakes
formed in different wavs but thev do
not include the
A corrie lake
B ribbon lake
C kettle lake
D crater lake
2. Fig. 9.8 on page 85 shows a lake cre-
ated by Man. It may be used for the
following purposes ercepl
A irrigating crops
For any four of. them, locate a dam and a river
in which the damming has taken place. Explain
briefly how each of the above purposes has been
successfully achieved.
Each of the following terms are in one way or
another connected with lake formation and
uses. For any five of them, give a concise expla-
nation of their implications and give a good
example of each:
(a) basin of inland drainage;
(b) tectonic lakes;
(c) haffs;
(d) beaver dams;
(d) playas;
(f) barrier lakes;
(g) tarns.
Distinguish between:
(a) freshwater lakes and basins of inland drain-
age;
(b) kettle lakes and crater lakes;
(c) tarns and haffs.
Explain any two of the following:
(a) 'Lakes are temporary features of the earth's
surface.'
(b) 'Glaciation creates a great variety of lakes.'
(c) 'Rivers intercepted by large inland lakes
have small deltas.'
(a) What are the chief economic uses of lakes?
(a) Name three lakes in any one continent and
say what each is most noted for.
(c) Name rwo well-known lakes in your own
country. With the aid of annotated diagrams
describe how each is formed.
5.
6.
8.
3.
^
B controlling floods
C channelling lava-flow
D generating hydro-electric power
Lake Malawi is an example of a lake
formed by
A earth movements
B glaciation
C erosional processes
D biological activities
The world's highest lake is
A Lake Victoria. Africa
B Lake Titicaca, South America
C Lake Baikal, Asia
D Lake Como, Europe
5. Rift valley lakes are formed through
the process of
A faulting
B folding
C glaciation
D vulcanicity

