Chapter 8 Limestone and Chalk Landforms
Limestone and Chalk
Limestone and chalk are sedimentary rocks of.
organic origin derived from the accumulation of cor-
als and shells in the sea. In its pure state, limestone
is made up of calcite or calcium carbonate, but where
magnesium is also present it is termed dolomite.
Chalk is a very pure form of limestone, white and
rather soft. Limestone is soluble in rain-water.
which, with carbon dioxide from the air, forms a
weak acid. A region with a large stretch of limestone
therefore possesses a very distinct type of topogra-
phy. It is then termed a karst region, a name derived
from the Karst district of Yugoslavia where such
topography is particularly well developed.
Gharacteristic Features of a Karst
Region
Generally speaking, karst regions have a bleak land-
scape, occasionally broken by precipitous slopes.
There is a general absence of surface drainage as
most of the surface water has gone underground.
Streams rising on other rocks only flow over lime-
stone for a short distance and then disappear under-
ground. For the greater part of their course, they cut
8.A A limestone escarpment. Notice that the valley is culti-
vated but the limestone is bleak and treeless. lnstitute of
Geological Science
8.8 A limestone pavement
their way along the joints and fissures of the rock
wearing out a system of underground channels. The
surface valleys are therefore dry. When the water
penetrates to the base of the limestone and meets
non-porous rocks it re-emerges on to the surface as
a spring or resurgence.
Limestones are well jointed and it is through these
joints and cracks that rain-water finds its way into
the underlying rock. Progressive widening by solu-
tion enlarges these cracks into trenches and a most

rain-water or mild acid
Fig. 8.1 Limestone pavement
intriguing feature called limestone payement is devel-
oped. The enlarged joints are called grikes and the
isolated, rectangular blocks are termed clints. The
limestone pavements may have been formed
beneath the soil and are now exposed by the removal
of the soil cover (Plate 8.B and Fig. 8.1).
On the surface of the limestone are numerous
swallow holes, which are small depressions carved
out by solution where rain-water sinks into the
limestone at a point of weakness. They are also
known as sink holes. Gaping Ghyll in Yorkshire is a
fine example. These holes grow in size through con-
tinuous solvent action-
Once water has sunk into the limestone, it etches
out caverns and passages along joints or bedding
planes. When the roof of an underground tunnel
Fig.8.2 Limestone scenery
cave collaPsed
dry valleY forming a gorge
alternating scar and scree. I scree
slopes developed on bands h
of different resistance I 
scar
gilKe
Swallow holes or sink
holes where stream goes
u ndergrounc,
cave with stalactites and
limestone
pavement
o
>cJ
-b;t
2o-
ec
oo
E
Y'O
.:;
ii6 o
€ E-s
:t-
E
lrmestone
surface v)4ith no-rivers
stream reappears on
surface
undergrouncl
course of stream
stalagmites

Fig. 8.3 The formation of dolina, uvala and polje in lime-
stone regions
collapses, a precipitous limestone gorge such as the
Cheddar Gorge is formed. Where a number of
swallow holes coalesce a larger hollow is formed
and is called a doline (Fig. 8.2). Several dolina may
merge as a result of subsidence to form a large de-
pression called an uvala. Some of them are a
kilometre across, containing much clayey soil from
the limestones. weathered after their subsidence
(Fig. 8.3).
In Yugoslavia, some very large depressions called
polje may be as large as a hundred square
kilometres but these are partly due to faulting. Dur-
ing the rainy season, parts of the floor which are at
Fig. 8.4 Limestone cave
stalactites
calclte plllar
stream flowing
through underground
passages
8.C A limestone cave in Phuket lsland, Thailand. Note the
stalactites. Goh Cheng Leong
or near the water-table may become temporary
lakes, but the drier areas are fertile and may sup-
port large villages.
Where subterranean streams descend through
swallow holes to underground passages, the region
may be honey-combed with caves and caverns
(Plate 8.C), some containing ponds and lakes. The
most spectacular underground features that adorn
the limestone caves are stalactites, stalagmites and
stalagmites
underground cavern formed
bv solullon in a zone of weakness

pillars. Stalactites are the sharp, slender, downward-
growing pinnacles that hang from the cave-roofs.
The water carries calcium in solution and when this
lime-charged water evaporates, it leaves behind the
solidified crystalline calcium carbonate. As moisture
drips from the roof it trickles down the stalactite
and drops to the floor where calcium is deposited to
form stalagmites. They are shorter, fatter and more
rounded. Over a long period, the stalactite hanging
from the roof is eventually joined to the stalagmite
growing from the floor to form a pillar (Fig. 8.4).
Such features are commonly seen in any well-
developed limestone caves e.g. Batu Caves, Kuala
Lumpur; Mammoth Caves, Kentucky and Carlsbad
Cave, New Mexico, in the U.S.A. and Postojna
Caves, Yugoslavia.
The Major Limestone Regions of the
World
The most characteristic stretch of limestone occurs
in north-west Yugoslavia. Other regions include: the
Causses district of southern France, the Pennines of
Britain, Yorkshire and Derbyshire in particular, the
Kentucky region of the United States, the Yucatan
Peninsula of Mexico, the Cockpit Country of
Jamaica and the limestone hills of Perlis. Peninsular
Malaysia.
Human Activities of Karst Regions
Karst regions are often barren and at best carry a
thin layer of soil. The porosity of the rocks and the
absence of surface drainage make vegetative growth
difficult, so that limestone can usually support only
poor grass and.short turf; some sheep grazing is pos-
sible. Limestone vegetation in tropical regions, how-
ever, is luxuriant because of the heavy rainfall all the
year round. Settlements are scattered and the pop-
8.D A dry valley in the chalk region of southern England
ulation is often sparse. The only mineral of impor-
tance is lead which occurs in veins in association with
limestone. Besides this, good quality limestones are
often used as building materials or quarried for the
cement industry. In Peninsular Malaysia, the lime-
stone outcrops of the Kledang Range and the Main
Range are quarried for the Pan-Malaysia and Tasek
Cement Works.
Chalk
The landforms of chalk are rather different from
those of other limestones. There is little or no sur-
face drainage and valleys which once contained riv-
ers are now dry. These are often called coombes.
The chalk forms low-rounded hills in southern and
south-eastern England, where they are called
'downs' and in northern France. The chalk is cov-
ered with short turf, and in places with woodland,
and is used for pasture and sometimes for arable
farming. Because of the friable nature of the rock,
swallow holes and underground cave networks do
not generally develop.
Ouestions and Exercises
1. Choose three ottstanding features of a karst
region. With the aid of diagrams, describe their
appearance and explain how they have been
formed.
2. The following features are associated with
karst topography:
(a) clints and grikes;
(b) dolina and uvalas;
(c) stalactites and stalagmites.
For any two of. them, with the aid of annotated
diagrams, explain their origin and locate an
actual example of each.

4,
5.
Explain why:
(a) Karst regions have very little surface drain-
age,
(b) Subterranean streams produce magnificent
underground scenery.
(c) Limestone areas have little agriculture and
are sparsely peopled.
With the aid of labelled diagrams, describe and
account for the development of physical fea-
tures which result from the action of. water in:
(a) limestone regions;
(b) deserts;
(c) granite uplands.
Draw a large diagram of a karst region and
indicate the following: swallow holes, lime-
stone gorge, dry valleys, limestone pavement
with clints and grikes. Describe briefly how any
two of them have been formed.
(a) What type of weathering is dominant in
limestone regions?
(b) Describe how rain-water acts on limestone
surfaces.
(c) For any large stretch of limestone regions
in which you are familiar describe some of
the characteristic physical features.
(a) Distinguish between 'limestone' and
'chalk'.
(b) Why are 'karst' features normally found in
hard, jointed limestone hills rather than in
softer and more porous chalk?
(c) Compare and contrast the physical fea-
tures of a limestone cave and that of a
chalk cliff.
(a) What is meant by 'underground scenery'?
(b) Name four characteristic features that
tourists normally encounter in regions with
such scenery.
(c) Attempt to sketch the features that typify
an'underground scenery'.
(a) Briefly distinguish between the following:
i. a dry valley and a glaciated valley;
ii. a limestone gorge and a canyon;
iii. a polje and a playa.
(b) With the aid of simple sketches or dia-
grams, attempt to show their contrasting
features.
(c) Name an area where each of the above fea-
tures may be found.
(a) Describe the manner in which a land sur-
face may be changed by:
i. the action of rain-water on limestone
regions;
ii. temperature changes in temperate con-
tinental interiors;
iii. glaciers moving down a valley.
(b) Draw annotated diagrams (where rele-
vant) to illustrate your answer.
8.
9.
10.
6.
Sample Objective Ouestions
1. The most characteristic feature of
the karst region is
A its lack of mineral resources
B the absence of surface drainage
C the presence of extensive flood
plains
D the predominance of earthquakes
2. Cave dwellers in limestone regions
may suffer from the risk of being
A frost-bitten
B gas-poisoned 
4.
C buried alive
D drowned
3. Photograph 8.B on page 76 shows a
limestone pavement which is the re-
sult of
A the action of rain-water on well-
jointed limestone
B frost action on a bedded lime-
stone plain
C rivers running through a karst re-
glon
D overgrazing in a chalk country
From the following list of geog-
raphical regions, the best developed
karst landscape is found in
A the Dinaric Alps of Yugoslavia
B northern Honshu in Japan
Swanland in West Australia
Patagonia in Argentina
Select from the terms given below
those that are associated with a karst
region:
I dolines
II erratics
III inselbergs
IV grikes
V canyons
VI coombes
A I, III and V
B I, IV and VI
C II, IV and VI
D III, IV and V
c
D
5.

