Chapter 3 Volcanism and Earthquakes
Landforms Associated with Volcanic
Activities
Volcanic activities have a profound influence on the
earth's landforms. Solid, liquid or gaseous materials
may find their way to the surface from some deep-
seated reservoir beneath. Molten magma is mobile
rock that forces its way into the planes of weakness
of the crust to escape quietly or explosively to the
surface.The resultant landforms depend on the
strength and fluidity of the magma, the types of
cracks, faults and joints that it penetrates, and the
manner in which it escapes to the surface. Magma
while thrusting its way up to the surface may cool
and solidify within the crust as plutonic rocks result-
ing in intrusive landforms. Magma that reaches the
surface and solidifies, forms extrusive landforms.
Rocks formed by either plutonic or volcanic activity
ale called igneous rocks.
Landforms of lgneous Intrusions
Perhaps the commonest intrusive landforms are si//s
and dykes. When an intrusion of molten magma is
made horizontally along the bedding planes of sed-
imentary rocks, the resultant intrusion is called a sill.
Fig. 3.1 lntrusive landforms of igneous intrusions in vol-
canic regions (showing sill. dyke, laccolith, lopolith, phacol-
ith and batholithl
sill forming a
bold 6carpment
dyke more resistant
than surrounding rocks
I39"o"o"Jr,
c6unrty ror*s mgam)f.prrfeo ui$"N rL 6fi6ffi
Denudation of the overlying sedimentary strata will
expose the intrusion which will resemble a lava flow,
or form a bold escarpment like the Great Whin Sill
of north-east England. Similar intrusions when
injected vertically as narrow walls of igneous rocks
within the sedimentary layers, are termed dykes.
Because of their narrowness, dykes seldom domi-
nate the landscape. When exposed to denudation
they may appear as upstanding walls or shallow
trenches, depending on whether they are more or
less resi$tant than the rocks in which they are
emplaced. Examples of dykes are the Cleveland
Dyke of Yorkshire, England'and hundreds of others
in the Isles of Mull and Arran in Scotland. A large,
very resistant dyke of quartzite forms a long ridge
to the north of Kuala Lumpur, called the Kelang
Gates Ridge.
Igneous intrusions on a larger scale are the various
types of '-lith'; Iaccolitlu, lopolitlu, phacoliths and
batholitln (Fig. 3.1). The names may sound difficult;
they are, in fact, all variations of igneous intrusions
placed differently in the earth's crust, and solidifying
within the upper layers of the crust. A laccolith is a
large blister or igneous mound with a dome-shaped
upper surface and a level base fed by a pipeJike con-
duit from below. It arches up the overlying strata of
lila platsu built up
by succcsive flows
x x--. 
x

sedimentary rocks, e.g. the laccoliths of the Henry
Mountains, in Utah, U.S.A.
A lopolith is another variety of ignbous intrusion
with a saucer shape. A shallow basin is formed in the
midst of the country rocks. The Bushveld lopoliths
of Transvaal, South Africa are good examples.
A phacolith is a lens-shaped mass of igneous rocks
occupying the crest of. an anticline or the bottom of
a syncline and being fed by a conduit from beneath.
An example of a phacolith is Corndon Hill in Shrop-
shire, England.
A batholith is a huge mass of igneous. rocks, usu-
ally granite, which after removal of the overlying
rocks forms a massive and resistant upland region
such as the Wicklow Mountains of Ireland, the
uplands of Brittany, France and the Main Range of
Peninsular Malaysia. Their precise mode of origin
is still a matter of controversy. It is generally
believed that large masses of magma rising upwards
metamorphosed the country rocks with which they
came into contact. These metamorphosed rocks
together with the solidified magma have given rise
to extensive batholiths, sometimes hundreds of kil-
ometres in extent. They are the most spectacular of
the intrusive landforms.
The Origin of Volcanoes
The ancient Greeks believed that volcanic eruptions
occurred when Vulcan. the God of Fire. stoked his
subterranean furnace beneath Vulcano, a small vol-
canic island off Sicily, from which the present word
volcano is derived. Of course, we no longer believe
this is true. Geologists and vulcanologists have
ascertained that volcanic activity is closely connected
with crustal disturbances, particularly where there
are zones of weakness due to deep faulting or moun-
tain folding. As temperature increases with increas-
ing-depth below the earth's crust, at an average rate
of about 1 oC for every 20 metres (1 "F for every 65
feet) of descent, the interior of the earth can be
expected to be in a semi-molten state, comprising
solid, liquid and gaseous materials, collectively
termed magma. The magma is heavily charged with
gases such as carbon dioxide, sulphurated hydrogen,
and small proportions of nitrogen, chlorine and
other volatile substances. The gases and vapour
increase the mobility and explosiveness of the lavas
which are emitted through the orifice or vent of a
volcano during a volcanic eruption (Plate 3.A).
There are two main types of lava.
1. Basic lavas. These are very hot lavas, about
1 000 "C(1,830 "F) andarehighlyfluid. Theyaredark
coloured like basalt, rich in iron and magnesium but
poor in silica. As they are poured out of the volcano,
they flow quietly and are not very explosive. Due to
their high fluidity, they flow readily with a speed of
16-48 km per hour (10-30 miles per hour). They
affect extensive areas, spreading out as thin sheets
over great distances before they solidify. The result-
ant volcano is gently sloping with a wide diameter
and forms a flattened shield or dome (Fig. 3.2).
2. Acid lavas. These lavas are highly viscous with a
high melting point. They arc light-coloured, of low
density, and have a high percentage of silica. They
Fig.3.2 Basic lava dome or shield volcano
3.A Mt. Mayon, Philippines, in eruption
crater
ighly f luid lava

3.8 Basalt columns of volcanic origin Algeria Servizio Edi-
toriale Fotografico
flow slowly and seldom travel far before solidifying.
The resultant cone is therefore steep-sided. The
rapid congealing of lava in the vent obstructs the
flow of the out-pouring lava, resulting in loud explo-
sions, throwing out many volcanic bombs or pyro-
c/asrs (Fig. 3.3). Sometimes the lavas are so viscous
that they form a spine or plug at the crater like that
of Mt. Pelee in Martinique (Fig. 3.a). Some spines
are very resistant and while most of the material of
very old volcanoes is removed by erosion the spine
may remain, e.g. Puy de Dome, France.
Types of Volcano
There are three types of volcano: active, dormant
and extinct. Volcanoes are said to be active when
they frequently erupt or at least when they have
erupted within recent time. Those that have been
known to erupt and show signs of possible eruption
in the future are described as dormant. Volcanoes
that have not erupted at all in historic times but
retain the features of volcanoes are termed extinct.
All volcanoes pass through active, dormant and
Fig. 3.3 Acid lava cone
sticky viscous lava
which cannot
flow far
matsaal removd by erosion
Fig. 3.4 A volcanic plug or spine after prolonged exposure
to erosion. The plug is more resistant and remains after most
of the volcanic materials have been worn away,
extinct stages but we can never be thoroughly sure
when they are extinct. Mt. Vesuvius and Mt. Kraka-
toa were once thought by people to be extinct and
yet both erupted most violently.
Extrusive Landforms
Extrusive landforms are determined by the nature
and composition of the lava and other ejected mate-
rials that reach the surface of the earth. The fluid
basic lava, flowing for long distances produces exten-
sive lava plains and basalt plateaux, such as the great
lava plains of the Snake Basin, U.S.A. The basalt
plateaux are found in many continents, e.g. the
north-western part of the Deccan Plateau and in Ice-
land.
Volcanic cones are most typical of the extrusive
features. The highly fluid lavas build up lava domes
or shield volcanoes with gently rising slopes and
broad, flattened tops. The volcanoes of Hawaii have
the best developed lava domes. The spectacular
Mauna Loa and Kilauea are so accessible that they
have been closely studied. Kilauea has a very steep-
walled caldera into which the active vent pours red
hot lava forming the lava-pit of Halemaumau. Thou-
sands of lava fountains rise and fall in the dazzling
pit.
The less fluid lavas that explode more violently
form ash and cinder cones with large central craters
and steep slopes. They are typical of small volcan-
oes, occurring in groups and seldom exceeding
300 metres (1,000 feet) in height, such as Mt. Nuovo,
near Naples and Mt. Paricutin in Mexico. The lava
flows are so viscous that they solidifu after a short
steeply sloping sides

3.C The twisted strata of a volcanic mountain in South
Africa
distance. When they are confined in valleys, they
form lava tongues and lava-dammed lakes when they
dam a river valley (Fig. 9.a). Other minor features
that may be associated with lava obstructions include
lava bridges and lava tunnels.
A volcanic region may be strewn with solid mate-
rials that were hurled from the vent of the volcano.
The very fine particles are the volcanic dust which
may be shot so high into the sky that it travels round
the world several times before it eventually comes
to rest. The dust or ash falls as 'black snow' and can
bury houses and people. The coarser fragmental
rocks are collectively called pyroclasts and include
cinders or lapilli, scoria, pumice andvolcanic bombs.
The highest and most common volcanoes have
composite cones. They are often called strato-volcan-
oes. The cones are built up by several eruptions of
lava, ashes and other volcanic materials from the
main conduit which leads down to a reservoir of
magma. Each new eruption adds new layers of ashes
or lava to the sides of the volcano, which grows
steadily in height. From the main conduit, subsidiary
dykes or pipes may reach the surface as feeders to
parasitic cones. Lava escapes through them to the
sides of the main cones (Fig. 3.5). Mt. Etna in Sicily
has hundreds of such parasitic cones. Another inter-
esting composite volcano is Mt. Stromboli whose
frequent eruptions that make the summit glow have
earned for it the name'Lighthouse of the Mediter-
ranean'. Other well-known composite volcanoes
include Mt. Vesuvius, Mt. Fuji, Mt. Popacatapetl
and Mt. Chimborazo.
of magma beneath
Fig. 3.5 A composite cone
During an eruption, materials from the top of the
cone is blown off or collapses into the vent, widening
the orifice into a large crater. Some volcanoes may
have greatly enlarged depressions called calderas,
which may be several kilometres across. These are
the result of violent eruptions accompanied by the
subsidence of much of the volcano into the magma
beneath (Fig. 3.6). Water may collect in the crater
or the caldera forming crater or caldera lakes, e.g.
Lake Toba in Sumatra and Crater Lake in Oreson
(Plate 3.D).
3.D Crater Lake in Oregon Servizio Editoriale Fotografico
;*P
lr r! 'rrli!
.l'i€i,.tlwa

Fig. 3.6 A caldera, A violent eruption weakens the structure
of the volcano and after eruption has ceased much of the
volcano subsides into the magma reservoir beneath. The
depression may later be filled with water to form a lake. .
Some Volcanic Eruptions
In the history of mankind perhaps the most disas-
trous eruptions were those of Mt. Vesuvius, Mt.
Krakatoa and Mt. Pelee.
MT. VESUVIUS
Mt. Vesuvius, standing 1 200 metres (4,000 feet)
above the Bay of Naples, erupted violently on 24 Aug-
ust A.D.79 taking the people who lived around it by
complete surprise. White-hot lava flowed from par-
asitic cones. In the midst of a thundering explosion,
the highly gaseous magma escaped as gigantic lumi-
nous clouds in cauliflower form and shot up to great
heights before it fell to earth as pyroclasts and ashes.
The city of Pompeii, located to the south-west, was
buried beneath 6 metres (20 feet) of volcanic ashes
which were later cemented by the torrential down-
pours of heavy rain that accompanied the violent
eruption. In a similar way, the city of Herculaneum
on the west was completely overwhelmed by a mud-
flow of ashes and cinders almost 15 metres (50 feet)
thick, washed down by torrential rain from the
slopes of Vesuvius. Almost the entire population of
the two cities was buried alive.
After this, minor eruptions occurred from time to
time but the fertility of the solidified volcanic ashes
tempted many farmers to begin anew on the slopes
of Vesuvius. Then came the catastrophic eruption of
December 1631 when an avalanche comprising red
hot volcanic debris, pasty lava and highly energized
gases ruined fifteen towns and killed 4 000 inhabit-
ants. The ashes that descended on Naples were
estimated to be one-third of a metre (a foot) thick.
MT. KRAKATOA
The greatest volcanic explosion known to men is
perhaps that of Mt. Krakatoa in August 1883. Kra-
katoa is a small volcanic island in the Sunda Straits,
midway between Java and Sumatra. Dense black
clouds of ashes shot 30-80 km (20-50 miles) high,
and were brought down as mud by the torrential rain
which fell over the adjacent islands. So much magma
was ejected from the underlying reservoir that two-
thirds of the island collapsed and disappeared form-
ing a huge submarine caldera. The explosion could
be heard in Australia, almost 4 800 km (3,000 miles)
away. In Jakarta the vibration shattered the window
panes of houses about 160 km (100 miles) away. The
fine dust that was thrown into the upper part of the
atmosphere travelled several times around the
world, causing brilliant sunsets and glowing sky in
many parts of the globe. Though Krakatoa itself was
not inhabited and nobody was killed by the lava
flows, the vibration set up enormous tidal waves
over 30 metres (100 feet) high which drowned 36 000
people in the coastal districts of Sumatra, Indonesia.
After remaining dormant for almost half a cen-
tury, an eruption in 1927 pushed up a cinder cone
from the submarine floor, culminating in a summit
of 66 metres (220 feet) above sea-level by 1952. This
new volcanic island was named Anak Krakatoa.
meaning 'the child of Mt. Krakatoa'.
MT. PELEE
The eruption of Mt. Pelee in the West Indies in May
1902 was the most catastrophic of modern times.
The volcano erupted white-hot lava and super-
heated'steam which swept down the slope at an
amazing speed as a nul6e ardente (glowing ava-
lahche). St. Pierre, the capital of Martinique, lying
on the path of the lava, was completely destroyed
within minutes. Its entire population of 30 000,
except two of them, was killed almost instantly.
Even the sea was boiling and all the ships in the har-
bour were wrecked.
The ejection of volcanic materials continued for
several months until a vertical spine rose from the
crater, almost 3(X) metres (1,000 feet) high by the
middle of 1903. The spine was formed by the pasty
lava, partially solidified in the neck of the volcano.
Part of the spine, however, crumbled under contin-
ual weathering as well as internal forces.
The Distribution of Volcanoes in the
World
Volcanoes are located in a fairly clearly-defined pat-
tern around the world, closely related to regions that
have been intensely folded or faulted. There are well
over 500 active volcanoes and thousands of dormant
3l

3.8 Mt. Mayon seen from the town of Legaspi, southern
Luzon Philippine Tourist and Travel Association
Fig. 3.7 World distribution of volcanoes, lava plateaux and
earthquakes
{&}'g
COLUMBIA A SNAKE R. PLATEAU
su
1r;
fl"*;tu"" ''o"'''"ffi
."" ffi- 
o1
Scale 1 :215,OOO,OOO

and extinct ones. They occur along coastal mountain
ranges, as offshore islands and in the midst of
oceans. but there are few in the interiors of conti-
nents. The greatest concentration is probably that in
the Circum-Pacific region, popularly termed the
'Pacific Ring of Fire', which has been estimated to
include two-thirds of the world's volcanoes
(Fig. 3.7). The chain of volcanoes extends for almost
3 200 km (2,000 miles) from the Aleutian Islands
into Kamchatka, Japan, the Philippines, and Indo-
nesia (Java and Sumatra in particular), southwards
into the Pacific islands of Solomon, New Hebrides,
Tonga and North Island, New Zealand. On the
other side of the Pacific, the chain continues from
the Andes to Central America (particularly Guate-
mala, Costa Rica and Nicaragua), Mexico and right
up to Alaska. It is said that there are almost L00
active volcanoes in the Philippines, 40 in the Andes,
35 in Japan, and more than 70 in Indonesia.
In contrast, the Atlantic coastshave comparatively
few active volcanoes but many dormdnt or extinct
volcanoes, e.g. Madeira, Ascension, St. Helena,
Cape Verde Islands and Canary Islands, but those
of Iceland and the Azores are active. Volcanoes of
the Mediterranean region are mainly associated with
the Alpine folds, e.g. Vesuvius, Etna, Stromboli,
Vulcano and those of the Aegean islands. A few
continue into Asia Minor (Mt. Ararat, Mt. Elbruz).
The Himalayas have, surprisingly, no active volcano
at all.
ln Africa, some volcanoes are found along the East
African Rift Valley, e.g. Mt. Kilimanjaro and Mt.
Kenya, both probably extinct. The only active vol-
cano of West Africa is Mt. Cameroun. There are
some volcanic cones in Malagasy, but active erup-
tion has not been known so far. The West Indian
islands have experienced some violent explosions in
recent times, e.g. Mt Pelee in Martinique, and in St.
Vincent further south. The Lesser Antilles are made
up mainly of volcanic islands and some of thern still
bear signs of volcanic liveliness. Elsewhere in the
interiors of continents-Asia, North America,
Europe and Australia, active volcanoes are rare.
Geysers and Hot Springs
Geysers are fountains of hot water and superheated
steam that may spout up to a height of 45 metres
(150 feet) from the earth beneath. The phenomena
are associated with a thermal or volcanic region in
which the water below is being heated beyond boil-
ing-point (100" Cl2L2" F). The jet of water is usually
emitted with an explosion, and is often triggered off
by gases seeping out of the heated rocks (Fig. 3.8).
Almost all the world's geysers are confined to three
major areas: Iceland, the Rotorua district of North
Island, New Zealand and Yellowstone Park of the
U.S.A. (Plate 3.F). The world's best known geyser
is perhaps 'Old Faithful' in Yellowstone National
Park, Wyoming which erupts at regular intervals-
every 63 minutes on the average.
Hot springs or thermal springs are more common,
3.F A geyser in Yellowstone National Park Servizio Editor'
iale Fotografico
Fig. 3.8 Hot springs and geysers

and may be found in any part of the earth where
water sinks deep enough beneath the surface to be
heated by the interior forces. The water rises to the
surface without any explosion. Such springs contain
dissolved minerals which may be of some medical
value. Iceland has thousands of hot springs. Some
of them have been harnessed to heat houses, swim-
ming pools and for other domestic purposes. Hot
springs and geysers have becorne tourist attractions,
e.g. in Japan and Hawaii, also Tambun, near Ipoh
(Malaysia).
Earthquakes
The earth is never free from earthquakes for long
and more than 50 000 of them are recorded
annually. Minor earth tremors caused by gentle
waves of vibration within the earth's crust occur
every few minutes. Major earthquakes, usually
caused by movement along faults, can be very dis-
astrous particularly in densely populated areas.
Earthquakes themselves may cause only restricted
damage in the regions of occurrence, but their after-
effects can be very catastrophic. They produce gi-
gantic tidal waves, called tsunamis by the Japanese,
which flood towns and drown thousands of people.
Fires break out beyond control as gas mains are shat-
tered and buildings collapse. In severe earthquakes,
fissures gape open, and the ground writhes and
undulates in the passage of the 'surface waves'. A
wave height of 7 mm (a quarter of an inch) in the
upheaval is sufficient to bring down most ordinary
buildings. Roads, railways and bridges are buckled
and twisted; telecommunications are cut when the
cables are snapped. Hills are so shaken that land-
slides are widespread. As the vibration thins out at
the edges, like the series of waves set up by a stone
thrown into the water, damage is greatly reduced.
Only the highly sensitive seismograph can record the
movements of earthquake waves.
SOME MAJOR EARTHQUAKES
One of the greatest earthquakes ever known was the
Great Lisbon Earthquake on 1 November 1755. It
originated in an abrupt subsidence of the ocean floor
in the Atlantic west of Lisbon. Tidal waves as high
as lL metres (35 feet) were set up which swept across
the coastal districts of Lisbon, drowning thousands.
Most of the buildings collapsed completely and it
was estimated that 60 000 inhabitants died. The
effects of the earthquake were felt within a 640 km
(400 miles) radius of Lisbon, in North Africa and
Europe.
The earthquake on 1 September L923 that shook
Tokyo and Yokohama was equally shocking. A frac-
ture that occurred in the earth's crust off the coast
of Japan caused the earthquake. The fragile build-
ings of the densely populated twin cities were mostly
ruined; more than half a million houses collapsed.
Widespread fires from factories, gas mains, oil
installations and kitchens killed a quarter of a tnil-
lion people and many more were injured.
Other disastrous earthquakes include that of San
Francisco in 1906 which ruined the greater part of
the heart of San Francisco. In.the loess region of
Kansu in China, the 1920 earthquake claimed
200 000lives, and again in 1927 when 100 000 cave-
dwellers were buried alive. In 1906 the earthquake
at Agadir, Morocco sealed the fate of 10 000 inhab-
itants, besides causing untold damage, and in 1968
there was a disastrous earthquake in eastern Iran,
with its epicentre at Kakh.
THE DISTRIBUTION OF EARTHQUAKES
The world's distribution of earthquakes coincides
very closely with that of volcanoes. Regions of great-
est seismicity are Circum-Pacific areas, with the epi-
centres and the most frequent occurrences along the
'Pacific Ring of Fire'.lt is said that as many as 70
per cent of earthquakes occur in the Circum-Pacific
belt. Another 20 per cent of earthquakes takes place
in the Mediterranean-Himalayan belt including Asia
Minor, the Himalayas and parts of north-west
China. Elsewhere, the earth's crust is relatively sta-
ble and is less prone to earthquakes, though
nowhere can be said to be immune to earth tremors.

Ouestions and Exercises
1. With the aid of annotated diagrams, write a
comparative account of landforms resulting
from intrusive and extrusive igneous activities.
2. Distinguish the difference in appearance and
origin of any three of the following pairs of
terms associated with vulcanicity:
(a) sills and dykes;
(b) cinder cones and lava domes;
(c) geysers and hot springs;
(d) crater and caldera;
(e) laccolith and lopolith.
3. Describe, with appropriate sketches, the major
types of landform originating from acid and
basic lavas.
Sample Obiective O,uestions
1. The 'Pacific Ring of Fire' takes an
arc shape, forming the circum-
Pacific belt and includes the follow-
ing ranges but no,
A the Rocky Mountains
B the Great Dividing Range
C the Andes
D the Japanese Alps
2. A geyser is best described as
A a fountain of superheated steam 
4.
B a pool of hot water
C an explosion of volcanic vaPour
D a thermal stream
3. Photograph 3.8 on Page 32 shows
Mt. Mayon of southern Luzon, the
On a map of the world, locate the chief volcanic
and earthquake areas. Write a descriptive
account of any one major volcanic eruption or
earthquake that has occurred in historical times.
You should include the causes, effects and con-
sequences of such a named occurrence.
The following terms are in one way or another
connected with volcanoes and earthquakes.
Choose one term from each of the sections A,
B and C and write what you know about them:
Section A
magma
lava
pyroclasts
Section B
Section C
B The Tungshan Earthquake in
China
C The Kakh Earthquake in eastern
Iran
D The San Francisco Earthquake in
the U.S.A.
5. In which part of New Zealand is
geothermal power, which is a result
of volcanic activity, most widely util-
ized?
A The Central Otago Region
B The Canterbury Plain
C The Auckland Peninsula
D The Rotorua Region
4.
5.
basalt plateau Vulcano
lava plain 
Tsunami
parasitic cones 'Old Faithful'
Philippines. Which of the following
statements about Mt. Mayon is most
acceptable?
A Mt. Mayon is in active eruption
B A crater lake is located at the
foot of the mountain
C Lava covers its hill slopes
D Extensive cultivation takes place
all along the slopes
Select the most recent and disastrous
earthquake from the list given be-
low.
A The Agadir Earthquake in
Morocco

