Chapter 1 The Earth and the Universe
Exploring the Universe
On a fine bright night when you look up at the sky,
it seems to be studded with stars. Little do you
realize that each of the stars is far bigger than the
earth on which we live. Some of the larger ones have
been estimated to be many millions of times the size
of the Earth. The stars are not scattered regularly
in space; they occur in clusters, better described as
galaxies or nebulas. Each galaxy may contain as
many as 100 million stars. It is believed that the
Earth's own galaxy (the Milky Way) alone contains
as many as 100 000 million stars.
The stars appear small to us even through a tele-
scope because they are so far away. The light from
the nearest star travelling at the speed of light (i.e.
299 4N kilometrey'186,000 miles per second) takes
something like four years to reach us. A ray of light
from the sun takes about eight minutes to reach the
Earth. Light takes only a second to reach us from
the moon.
The Solar System
The solar system comprises the Sun and its nine
planets (Fig. 1.1) which are believed to have been
developed from the condensation of gases and other
Fig. 1.1 The Solar System - the Sun and the nine Planets
-- Dlstance lrom Sun to Planet ----
lesser bodies. All the planets revolve round the Sun
in elliptical orbi*.Like the Earth, they shine only by
the reflected light of the Sun. The Sun has a surface
temperature of 6 000 "C (10 800 "F) and increases to
20 million'C (36 million "F) in the interior. All over
its surface are fiery gases that leap up in whirls of
glowing flames like a volcano in eruption. In size,
the Sun is almost unimaginable. It is about 300 000
times as big as the Earth!
Amongst the nine planets, Mercury is the smallest
and closest to the Sun, only 57 900 000 km (36 mil-
lion miles) away. It thus completes its orbit in a
much shorter space of time than does Earth. A year
in Mercury is only 88 days. Venus, twice the distance
away from the Sun, is the next closest planet. It is
often considered as 'Earth's twin' because of their
close proximity in size, mass (weight) and density.
But no other planet is in any way comparable to
Earth which has life and all the living things we see
around us. Like many other planets, the Earth has
a natural satellite, the Moon, 384 629 km (238,900
miles) away, that revolves eastward around the
Earth once in every 27 days.
The fourth planet from the Sun is Mars which has
dark patches on its surface and is believed by most
professional astronomers to be the next planet after
Earth to have the possibility of some plant life.
5 A5O OOO OO0 km
{4.566,000,0OO mi16l
-___- 2852000000
(1,783.000.000
o'o
'(-j"
I L/)
o64/ o
"lo
I
I
I
I
I
I
i
I
I
I
\,
I
I
I
I
I
I
I
I
I
I
I
PLUTO
o
oAV
I
I
I
T'
I
I
a
o
o

1.A The Earth viewed from the moon. The picture was
taken on the Apollo 8 mission of 1968 which prepared the
way for the moon landing. Camera Press
Much attention has been focused on Mars to explore
the possibilities of extending Man's influence to it.
Next comes Jupiter, the largest planet in the solar
system. Its surface is made up of many gases like
hydrogen, helium and methane. It is distinguished
from other planets by its circular light and dark
bands, and the twelve satellites that circle round it.
As it is more than 780 million km (485 million miles)
from the Sun, its surface is very cold, probably about
-128'C (-200 'F).
Another unique planet is Saturn which has three
rings and nine satellites around it. In size, it is the
second largest after Jupiter. It is so far from the Sun
that it takes29i years to complete its orbit. The sev-
enth planet, Uranus, was not known to astronomers
until the late eighteenth century when it was first
seen as a faint bluish-green disc through a very pow-
erful telescope. It is another giant planet, 50 times
larger than Earth and 15 times as heavy. Unlike
other planets, IJranus orbits around the Sun in a
clockwise direction from east to west with five sat-
ellites revolving round it.
The two outermost planets in the solar system,
Neptune and Pluto, are just visible with telescopes.
Their discoveries were the result of mathematical
calculations on their irregular gravitational effects
on neighbouring planetary bodies. Neptune closely
resembles tlranus, except that it has only two known
satellites and is probably much colder. Pluto is
smaller than Earth. As the orbits of the planets are
not circular but elliptical (Fig. 1.2), the distance of
Pluto from the Sun during perihelion (i.e. when it is
closest to the Sun) is 4 451 million km (2,766 million
miles), and at aphelion (i.e. when it is farthest from
the Sun) is 7 348 million km (4,566 million miles)'
A year in Pluto is no less than 248 years on Earth!
Due to their very recent discovery and their extreme
remoteness from the Earth, very little is so far
known about these last two planets.
Fig. 1.2 The elliptical orbit of the planets (including the
Earth) round the Sun, resulting in greater distance during the
aphelion than the perihelion

The Shape of the Earth
ln the olden days, sailors feared to venture far into
the distant ocean because they thought the Earth
was as flat as a table. They thought that when they
reached the edge of the Earth, they would slip down
and perish in the bottomless ocean. This is, of
course, not true. From years of accumulated knowl-
edge, experience and observations in different parts
of the world, we know that the Earth is round. Its
spherical shape is an established fact, proved and
accepted by all. There has been so much research
done on earth science that its various dimensions
have been accurately found. It has an equatorial cir-
cumference of 40 084 km (24,897 miles) and its
polar circumference is less by 133 km (83 miles). Its
equatorial diameter is L2 761 km (7,926 miles) and
its polar diameter is shorter by 42 km (26 miles).
This simply shows that the Earth is not a perfect
sphere. It is a little flattened at both ends like an
orange. It can, in fact, be called a geoid ('earth-
shaped'). The spherical shape of the Earth is also
masked by the intervening highlands and oceans on
its surface.
Evidence of the Earth's Sphericity
There are many ways to prove that the Earth is
spherical. The following are some of them. Proofs
2-7 were used in the days before satellite photo-
graphs proved conclusively that the earth is round.
l. Aerial photographs. Pictures taken from high
altitudes by rockets and satellites show clearly the
curved edge of the Earth. This is perhaps the most
convincing and the most up-to-date proof of the
Earth's sphericity (Plate 1.A).
Fig. 1.3(a) Circumnavigation of the Earth
Fig. 1.3(bl Abrupt drop at the edge of a table-like earth
Fig. 1.4(a) Increasing altitude widens the circular horizon.
Viewed from Y the horizon would be AB but from a higher
viewpoint (X) a wider horizon (CD) would be seen
Fig. 1.4(b) Visible horizon remains the same regardless of
altitude. lf the Earth were flat the horizon seen from either
Y or or X would be the same.
2. Circumnavigation of the Earth. The first voyage
around the world by Ferdinand Magellan and his
crew, from 1519 to 1522 proved beyond doubt that
the Earth is spherical. No traveller going round the
world by land or sea has ever encountered an abrupt
edge, over which he would fall. Modern air routes
and ocean navigation are based on the assumption
that the Earth is round (Fig. 1.3).
3. The circular horizon. The distant horizon viewed
from the deck of a ship at sea, or from a cliff on land
is always and everywhere circular in shape. This cir-
I 
VIEWPOINT
-{ffiryrye-

A CURVED EARTH
Fig. 1.5(a) The mast of a ship is seen before the hull on a
curved horizon.
cular horizon widens with increasing dltitude and
could only be seen on a spherical body. This is illus-
trated in Fig. 1.4.
4. Ship's visibitity. When a ship appears over the
distani horizon, the top of the mast is seen first
before the hull. In the same way, when it leaves har-
Fig. 1.6(a) Sunrises and sunsets at different times for dif-
ferent places
Fig. 1.6(b) The whole world will have sunrise or sunset at
the same time.
A FLAT EARTH
Fig. 1 .5(b) A flat Earth. the entire ship is seen at once on a
flat surface.
Circular
earth's
shadow
Fig. 1.7 The circular shadow of the Earth on the moon dur-
ing lunar eclipse.
bour, its disappearance over the curved surface is
equally gradual. If the earth were flat, the entire ship
would be seen or obscured all at once. This is appar-
ent from Fig. 1.5.
5. Sunrise and sunset. The sun rises and sets at dif-
ferent times in different places. As the Earth rotates
from west to east, places in the east see the Sun
earlier than those in the west. If the Earth were flat,
the whole world would have sunrise and sunset at
the same time. But we know this is not so. Fig. 1.6
illustrates this.
6. The lunar eclipse. The shadow cast by the Earth
on the moon during a lunar eclipse is always circular.
It takes the outline of an arc of a circle. Only a
sphere can cast such a circular shadow (Fig. 1.7).
7. Planetary bodies are spherical. All observations
from telescopes reveal that the planetary bodies, the
Sun. Moon. satellites and stars have circular outlines
from whichever angle you see them. They are strictly
spheres. Earth, by analogy, cannot be the only
exception.

The Earth's Movement
Man is always conscious of the apparent movement
of the Sun and little realizes that the Earth on which
he stands is constantly in motion. When the sun dis-
appears, he says that the sun sets and when it
emerges, he says that the sun rises. He is not the
least aware that the sun, in fact, does not rise or set,
it is 'we who rise and we who set'!
The Earth moves in space in two distinct ways: it
rotates from west to east once in every 24 hours,
causing day and night;it also revolves round the sun
in an orbit once in every 3651days, causingthe sea-
sons and the year.
Day and Night
When the Earth rotates on its own axis, only one
half of the Earth's surface comes into the rays of the
Sun and experiences daylight. The other half which
is away from the Sun's rays will be in darkness. As
the Earth rotates from west to east, every part of the
Earth's surface will be brought under the Sun at
some time or other. A part of the Earth's surface
that emerges from darkness into the Sun's rays
experiences sunrise. Later, when it is gradually
obscured from the Sun's beams it experiences sunset.
The Sun is, in fact, stationary and it is the Earth
Fig. 1.9(al Kuala Lumpur emerges from darkness into day-
light at sunrise when the Earth rotates into the Sun's rays.
Fig. 1.9(b) The Sun is directly overhead at Kuala Lumpur at
midday.
which rotates. The illusion is exactly the same as
when we travel in a fast-moving train. The trees
and houses around us appear to move and we feel
that the train is stationary. Fig. i.9 explains the
Earth's rotation and the causes of day and night.
The Earth's Revolution
When the Earth revolves round the Sun, it travels
on an elliptical orbit at a speed of 30 km (18.5 miles)
per second or 107 182 kmlh (66.600 m.p.h.). One
complete revolution takes 365+1 days or a year. As
it is not possible to show a quarter of a day in the
calendar, a normal year is taken to be 365 days, and
an extra day is added every four years as a Leap
Year.
VARYING LENGTHS OF DAY AND NIGHT
The axis of the Earth is inclined to the plane of the
ecliptic (the plane in which the Earth orbits round
the Sun) at an angle of 66L, giving rise to different
seasons and varying lengths of day and night
(Fig. 1.10). If the axis were perpendicular to this
plane, all parts of the globe would have equal days
and nights at all times of the year, but we know this
is not so. In the northern hemisphere in winter
(December) as we go northwards, the hours of dark-
ness steadily increase. At the Arctic Circle (66*. N),
Fig. 1.9(c) Kuala Lumpur passes from daylight into dark-
ness at sunset when the Earth rotates away from the Sun.
Fig. 1.9(d) Kuala Lumpur is directly away from the Sun at
midnight.
-----)F-
_____>_
-->-
----)-
-->-
__>_
_--+-
-----)-_

Fig. 1.10(a) The revolution of the Earth and its effects on
seasons and the variations of lengths of day and night
*'l;i3:::i'""
Fig. 1.10(b) A simplified diagram showing the annual
movement of the Sun and the causes of the seasons
the Sun never'rises' and there is darkness for the
whole day in mid-winter on 22 December. Beyond
the Arctic Circle the number of days with complete
darkness increases, until we reach the North Pole
(90' N) when half the year will have darkness. [n the
summer (June) conditions are exactly reversed.
Daylight increases as we go polewards. At the Arctic
Circle, the Sun never 'sets' at mid-summer (21 June)
and there is a complete 24-hour period of continuous
daylight. In summer the region north of the Arctic
Circle is popularly referred to as Land of the Mid-
night Sun (Plate 25.A, page 234). At the North
Pole, there will be six months of continuous day-
light. Fig. 1.10(a) illustrates the revolution of the
Earth and its inclination to the plane of the ecliptic
which cause the variation in the length of day and
night at different times of the year.
In the southern hemisphere, the same process
takes place, except that the conditions are reversed.
When it is summer in the northern hemisphere, the
southern hemisphere will experience winter. Mid-
summer at the North Pole will be mid-winter at the
South Pole.
THE ALTITUDE OF THE MIDDAY SUN
In the course of a year, the Earth's revolution round
the Sun with its axis inclined at 66!. to the plane of
the ecliptic changes the apparent altitude of the mid-
day Sun. The Sun is vertically overhead at the equator
on two days each year. These are usually 21 March
and 23 September though the date changes because
a year is not exactly 365 days. These two days are
termed equinoxes meaning'equal nights' because on
these two days all parts of the world have equal
length of days and nights. After the March equinox
the Sun appears to move north and is vertically over-
head at the Tropic of Cancer (23+"N) on about 2L
June. This is known as the June or summer solstice,
when the northern hemisphere will have its longest
day and shortest night. By abofi22 December, the
Sun will be overhead at the Tropic of Capricorn
(23+'S). This is the winter solstice when the south-
ern hemisphere will have its longest day and shortest
night. London is furthest from the sun during the
winter solstice (22nd December) in the northern
hemisphere. Fig. 1.11shows the varying distances of
the Sun from London at different seasons of the
year.
The Tropics thus mark the limits of the overhead
Sun, for beyond these, the Sun'is never overhead
at any time of the year. Such regions are marked by
distinct seasonal changes-spring, summer, autumn
and winter. Beyond the Arctic Circle (66*'N) and
the Antarctic Circle (66+' S) where darkness lasts for
6 months and daylight is continuous for the remain-
ing half of the year, it is always cold; for even during
the short summer the Sun is never high in the sky.
Within the tropics, as the midday Sun varies very
little from its vertical position at noon daily, the four
seasons are almost indistinguishable. Days and
nights are almost equal all the year round
(Fig. 1.10b).
Fig. 1.11 The varying distance of the Sun from London at
different seasons of the vear
Summer Solstice
Spring Equinox
(London is funhestJrom the sun when it is
overhead at Tropic rit Capricorn in Oecember.)

OVERHEAD SUN
OBLIOUE SUN
Highly dispersed heat
(even lovver temperaturel
Concentrated heat
(higher temperaturel
SEASONAL CHANGES AND THEIR EFFECTS ON
TEMPERATURE
Summer is usually associated with much heat and
brightness and winter with cold and darkness. Why
should this be so? In summer, the Sun is higher in
the sky than in winter. When the Sun is overhead its
rays fall almost vertically on the Earth, concentrat-
ing'its heat on a small area; temperatuTe therefore
rises and summers are always warm. In winter the
oblique rays of the Sun, come through the atmos-
phere less directly and have much of their heat
absorbed by atmospheric impurities and water
vapour. The Sun's rays fall faintly and spread over
a great area. There is thus little heat, and temper-
atures remain low (Fig. 1.12).
In addition, days are longer than nights in summer
and more heat is received over the longer daylight
duration. Nights are shorter and less heat is lost.
There is a net gain in total heat received and tem-
perature rises in summer. Shorter days and longer
nights in winter account for the reverse effects.
HOW TO CALCULATE THE ANGLE OF ELEVATION OF THE
MIDDAY SUN
To find the angle of elevation of the midday Sun of
a given place at a given part of the year
You may be asked to calculate the elevation of the
midday Sun at a place, say Milan (Latitude 46" N),
on 21 June. This is simple when done with the aid
of a diagram.
The following is a worked example, and you
should work on a few similar examples yourself.
First draw a circle as shown in Fig. 1.13 to rep-
resent the Earth and on it mark N and S, the North
and South Poles, O, the centre of the Earth, and E
and Q, the equator. On the circumference mark the
point M to represent the location of Milan at latitude
OBLIOUE SUN
Earth's surface
(lower temp€rature)
Fig.1.12 The effects of overhead
and oblique Sun's rays on temper-
atu re
46' north of the equator, such that LMOQ : 46"
(as measured by your protractor).
Produce the line OM to A to represent a line from
M to the zenith of the universe. Draw MT, the tan-
gent at M, to represent a line to the horizon.
As the date given is 21 June (i.e. summer solstice
for the northern hemisphere), the Sun is overhead
at the Tropic of Cancer, i.e.23L N. Draw OP such
that ZPOQ = 23L'and produce the line OP to C to
indicate the direction of rays from the overhead Sun.
Through M draw MB parallel to OPC. This line rep-
resents the direction of the Sun's rays reaching M,
and ZBMT is thus the angle of elevation of the mid-
day Sun and is 671'. The actual working is shown
below:
Since MB is parallel to OPC,
ZAMB : ZMOP :_:2":t+
_ 
LL2
As ZAMT is a right angle (i.e. 90')
ZBMT : 90"-22*
: 67i.
Thus on 21 June, the elevation of the midday Sun
at Milan is 67i'.
Fig. 1.13 Finding the angle of elevation of the middav Sun
at Milan on 21 June (latitude of Milan is 46' N)
K*":'rP

To calculate the latitude of a place from the Sun's
elevation, at a certain part of the year
Sometimes you may be asked to find the latitude of
a place given the angle of elevation of the midday
Sun at a certain part of the year. An example is given
below.
Suppose the place given is X in the southern
hemisphere and the angle of elevation of the mid-
day Sun at X on 23 September is 37'. What is its
latitude?
Overhead Sun
-------->R
37' 
Angle ot elevalion ol lh.3!n
!-r 
- ------->0
Fig. 1.14 Finding the latitude of a place X on 23 September
given that the angle of elevation is 37. S
First draw a circle as shown in Fig. 1.14 to rep-
resent the Earth and on it mark N and S. E and
Q and O to represent the North and South Pole, the
equator and the centre of the Earth respectively.
At the equinox, i.e. 23 September, when the Sun
is overhead at the equator, the latitude of a place is
simply 90" minus the angle of the elevation of the
midday Sun, i.e. 90" - 37o : 53'. The working based
on the diagram in Fig. 1.14 is thus:
Since the declination of the Sun at the equinox
isO
LBXD = 37"(i.e. the angle of the elevation
given)
LCXD : 53"(90"-37")
LCXD = XOQ (corresponding Zs)
: 53o
So the latitude of X is 53' S.
Dawn and Twilight
The brief period between sunrise and full daylight
is called dawn, and that between sunset and com-
plete darkness is termed twilight. This is caused by
the fact that during the periods of dawn and twilight
the Earth receives diffused or refracted light from
night 
B
Fig. 1.15(a) Dawn and sunlight at the equator
Fig. 1.1S(bl Dawn and sunlight in temperate latitudes
At the equator the Sun rises and sets almost vertically so the
time taken to pass through the 'twilight zone' (AB) will be
shorter than for temperate latitudes where the Sun rises and
sets obliquely. Here the time taken to pass through the twi-
light zone (CD) is longer.
the Sun whilst it is still below the horizon. Since the
Sun rises and sets in a vertical path at the equator
the period during which refracted light is received
is short. But in temperate latitudes, the Sun rises
and sets in an oblique path and the period of
refracted light is longer. It is much longer still at the
poles, so that the winter darkness is really only twi-
light most of the time. (Fig. 1.15)
Mathematical Location of Places on
the Globe
The Earth's surface is so vast that unless a mathe-
matical method can be used, it is impossible to locate
any place on it. For this reason, imaginary lines have
been drawn on the globe. One set running east and
(a)
cg
o
Io
o

Fig. 1.16(a) Parallel of latitude
Fig. 1.16(b) Meridians of longitude
west, parallel to the equator, are called lines of lat-
itude. The other set runs north and south passing
through the poles and are called lines of longitude
(Fig. 1.16). The intersection of latitude and longi-
tude pin-points any place on the Earth's surface
(Fig. 1.17). For example, Kuala Lumpur is 3' L0' N
and 101' 40' E; London is 51" 30'N and 0o 5'W,
and Sydney is 33o 55' S and l5I" 12' E. We shall
examine more closely how latitude and longitude
are determined and the role they play in mathema-
tical geography.
Latitude
Latitude is the angular distance of a point on the
Earth's surface, measured in degrees from the centre
of the Earth as shown in Fig. 1.16(a). It is parallel
to a line, the equator, which lies midway between
the poles. These lines are therefore called parallels
of latitude, and on a globe are actually circles,
becoming smaller polewards. The equator repre-
sents 0" and the North and South Poles are 90o N and
90" S. Between these points lines of latitude are
drawn at intervals of Lo. For precise location on a
map, each degree is subdivided into 60 minutes and
each minute into 60 seconds. The most important
lines of latitude are the equator, the Tropic of Can-
cer (231'N), the Tropic of Capricorn (23L S), the
Arctic Circle (66*'N) and the Antarctic Circle
(66t" S). As the Earth is slightly flattened at the
poles, the linear distance of a degree of latitude at
the pole is a little longer than that at the equator.
For example at the equator (0') it is 110 km (68.704
miles), at 45'it is 111 km (69.054 miles) and at the
poles it is 111.7 km (69.,107 miles). The average is
taken as 111 km (69 miles).This is a useful figure and
Fig. 1.17(a) The latitude of 38'N is the angular distance of
a point on the Earth's surface north of the centre of the
Earth.
Fig. 1.17(bl The longitude of 135" W is the angular distance
west of the Prime Meridian
Fig. 1.17(c) The precise location of place X is latitude 52" N
and longitude 27" W where they intersect.
can be used for calculating distances to any place.
Cairo is 30'N; it is therefore 30 x L11 or 3 330 km
(2,070 miles) from the equator. With the aid of your
atlas find the approximate distance of the following
places from the equator: Singapore, Kota Bharu,
Paris, New York, Buenos Aires, and Auckland.
4.v\t
l0

1.8 An external view of the Greenwich observatory Popper-
foto
Longitude
Longitude is an angular distance measured in
degrees along the equator east or west of the Prime
(or First) Meridian, as indicated in Fig. 1.16(b). On
the globe longitude is shown as a series of semicircles
that run from pole to pole passing through the equa-
tor. Such lines are also called meridians.Unlike the
equator which is centrally placed between the poles,
any meridian could have been taken to begin the
numbering of longitude. It was finally decided in
1884, by international agreement, to choose as the
zero meridian the one which passes through the
Royal Astronomical Observatory at Greenwich,
near London (Plate 1.B). This is the Prime Meridian
(0o) from which all other meridians radiate eastwards
and westwards up to 180". Since the Earth is spher-
ical and has a circumference calculated at 40 084 km
(24,897 miles), in linear distance each of the 360
degrees of longitude is 40 084 (24 897 + 360) or
111.3 km (69 miles) at the equator. As the parallels
of latitude become shorter polewards, so the meri-
dians of longitude, which converge at the poles, en-
close a narrower space. The degree of longitude
therefore decreases in length. It is longest at the
equator where it measures 11i.3 km (69 miles). At
25" it is 101 km (63 miles), at 45" it is 79 km (49
miles), at75" 29 km (18 miles) and at the poles 0 km
(0 mile). There is so much difference in the length of
degrees of longitude outside the tropics, that they
are not used for calculating distances as in the case of
latitude. But they have one very important function,
they determine local time in relation to GMT or
Greenwich Mesn Time. which is sometimes referred
to as World Time.
Longitude and Time
Local time. Since the Earth makes one complete
rotation of 360' in one day or 24 hours, it passes
through '1..5" in one hour or f in 4 minutes. The Earth
rotates from west to east, so every 15o we go east-
wards,local time is advanced by t hour. Conversely,
if we go westwards,local time is retarded by t hour.
We may thus conclude that places east of Greenwich
see the Sun earlier and gain time, whereas places
west of Greenwich see the Sun later and lose time.
If we know GMT, to find local time, we merely have
to add or substract the difference in the number of
hours from the given longitude, as illustrated above.
A simple memory aidforthiswill be East-Gain-Add
( E. G. A. ) and West- Lose-Substract (W. L. S. ) . Y ou
could coin your own rhymes for the abbreviations.
Hence when it is noon, in London (Longitude
0'5' W), the local time for Kuala Lumpur (102" E)
will be mathematically 6 hours 48 minutes ahead of
London or 6.48 p.m. But the local time for New
York (74"W) will be mathematically 4 hours 56 min-
utes behind London or 7:04 a.m. We can put it in
another way, when Londoners are having lunch,
Malaysians will be having dinner and New Yorkers
will be having breakfast (Fig. 1.18). This is difficult
to believe, but it is true. The rotation of the Earth
round the Sun means that at any point in time dif-
ferent places will experience a different time of day.
The example shown in Fig. L.18 on longitude and
time is mathematically calculated at the rate of t hour
difference for 15o change in longitude and 4 minutes
for every degree. As such, when it is noon in London
(0'longitude), it is 6.48 p.m. in Kuala Lumpur (lon-
gitude 102' E) and 7.04 a.m. in New York (longitude
74" E). In actual practice this is not so. Different
countries fall into different time zone intervals, and
they do not fit themselves strictly into the mathe-
matically determined time zones. They choose their
own standard time which is most convenient to them
in terms of administration, daylight-saving, inter-
national trade, etc. but without varying too much
ll

Fig. 1.18 Longitude and Time-when it is noon in London,
it is 6.48 p.m. in Kuala Lumpur (102" E) and 7.04 a.m. in New
York (74' W) (Mathematically calculated)
from the approximate time zones in which the coun-
try falls into. The government of a country may
choose to change the standard time to suit admin-
istration, especially so when a country is separated
by a large water body.
Take Malaysia as an example. It has changed its
standard time four times since 1941. Before the Sec-
ond World War, Peninsular Malaysia (formerly
known as Malaya) was 7 hours ahead of GMT in line
with its position in the seventh time zone east of
Greenwich (i.e. between 90'and 105'longitude). In
1941, during the British colonial period, the time
was advanced by half an hour so that there would
be more time for recreation in the evening. This was
done with the passing of a daylight saving act.
Malaya was then 7* hours ahead of GMT. When the
Japanese occupied Malaya, they moved the time 2
hours ahead to coincide with that of the time in
Japan. The country was then t hours ahead of GMT.
However, this did not last long. As soon as the Jap-
anese surrendered at the end of the Second World
War and the British returned to the country, the
time was reverted to 7! hours ahead of GMT. This
system continued till the end of 1981 when the Gov-
ernment decided to have one single time zone for
both Peninsular Malaysia and East Malaysia (Sabah
and Sarawak), which being separated by the vast
South China Sea, have a half hour difference
between them. Kuala Lumpur's (Peninsular Malay-
sia) is l02o E, compared to Kota Kinabalu's (East
EAST
'-'-'-'-'-'-'* 
e.c.e.
(EAST,GAIN.AOOI
KUALA LUMPUR
Malaysia) 116'E. From I January 19E2, Malaysia
adopted a standard time for both Peninsular and
East Malaysia, which is t hours ahead of GMT. The
Republic of Singapore, which lies just south of Pen-
insular Malaysia also adopted the time switch for
convenience of trade and communications.
With this shift in standard time to 8 hours ahead
of GMT for Malaysia and Singapore, the other coun-
tries in this Asiatic region which will also come
under the same time zone include Brunei, the Phil-
ippines, Hong Kong, China, Taiwan, eastern Indo-
nesia, parts of Vietnam and the Soviet Union.The
ASEAN countries which do not come under this
time zone are Thailand and the western part of
Indonesia.
There are many ways of determining the longitude
of a place. The simplest way is to compare the local
time with GMT by listening to BBC radio. For
example: the captain of a ship in the midst of the
ocean wants to find out in which longitude his ship
lies. If GMT is 8'00 a.m. and it is noon in the local
region, it means that he is four hours ahead of
Greenwich, and must be east of Greenwich. His lon-
gitude is 4 x 15'or 60oE.
Standard Time and Time Zones
If each town were to keep the time of its own merid-
ian. there would be much difference in local time
between one town and the other. At 10'00 a.m. in
WEST
i 
IWEST.LOSE.SUBTRACT)
4 hrs. 56 mins
.-.-Jt.-
+
t02"e
o"s
I
I
l-l
| 
6.48 e.m. I
o,r,rhen
LUNCH
l2

o,o oo
o
Fig. 1.19 The World Time Zones
George Town, Penang, it would be 10'10 a.m. in
Kota Bharu (a difference of. 2+ in longitude). In
larger countries such as Canada, the U.S.A., China
and the U.S.S.R. the confusion arising from time
differences alone would drive the people mad. Trav-
ellers going from one end of the country to the other
would have to keep changing their watches if they
wanted to keep their appointments. This is imprac-
tical and very inconvenient.
To avoid all these difficulties, a system of standard
time is observed by all countries. Most countries
adopt their standard time from the central meridian
of their countries. The Malaysian government has
accepted the meridian of 120'east for the standard
time which is 8 hours ahead of Greenwich Mtian
Time as from 1 January 1982. The whole world has
in fact been divided into 24 Standard Time Zones,
each of which differs from the next by 15' in longi-
tude or one hour in time. Most countries adhere to
this division but due to the peculiar shapes and
locations of some countries, reasonable deviations
from the Standard Time Zones cannot be avoided
(Fig. 1.1e).
Larger countries like the U.S.A., Canada and the
U.S.S.R. which have a great east-west stretch have
to adopt several time zones for practical purposes. The
U.S.S.R., the largest country, which extends through
almost 165" of longitude, is divided into eleven time
oo o-
o)r
zones. When it is 10.00 p.m. on a Monday night in
Leningrad, it will be almost 7.00 a.m. the following
Tuesday morning in Vladivostock. Travellers along
the Trans-Siberian Railway have to adjust their
watches almost a dozen times before they reach their
destination. Both Canada and the U.S.A. have five
time zones-the Atlantic, Eastern, Central, Mountain
and Pacific Time Zones. The difference between the
Iocal time of the Atlantic and Pacific coasts is nearly
five hours (Fig. 1.20).
Fig.'1.20 The five time zones of Canada and the four time
zones of the U.S.A.
ooooooooo
o-,, .e "B "R E I "B I "B "g "g k'B
o|r)o^
'B 'g 'B
Scale 1 : 215.OOO,OOO
- 
6.00 7.d) 8.oo 
9.oo 
10.OO +
'- 
a.m.i'.o.- i a.m. i 
a.m, i 
a,m. +
l3

The International Date Line
A traveller going eastwards gains time from Green-
wich until he reaches the meridian L80'E when he
will be L2 hours ahead of GMT. Similarly in going'
westwards, he loses 12 hours when he reaches
180" W. There is thus a total difference of 24 hours
or a whole day between the two sides of the 180"
meridian. This is the International Date Line where
the date changes by exactly one day when it is cross-
ed. A traveller crossing the date line from east to
lre.rt loses a day (because of the loss in time he has
made); and while crossing the date line from west to
east he gains a day (because of the gain in time he
encountered). Thus when it is midnight, Friday on
the Asiatic side, by crossing the line eastwards, he
gains a day; it will be midnight Thursday on the
American side, i.e. he experiences the same cal-
endar date twice! When Magellan's ship eventually
arrived home in Spain in 1,522 after circumnavigating
the world from the Atlantic Ocean to the Pacific
Ocean and westwards across the International Date
Line, the crew knew nothing about adding a day for
the one they had missed. They thought they had
arrived on the 5 September. They were shocked to
be told that the date was 6 September. A modern
aircraft leaving Wellington at 5.00 p.m. on Friday
reaches Hawaii 6 601 km (4,100 miles) away at
2.00 p.m. the same Friday. The same aircraft on its
return journey from Hawaii leaves at 6.00 p.m. on
Friday but arrives at Wellington at 1L.00 a.m. on
Sunday. Can you explain this?
The International Date Line in the mid-Pacific
curves from the normal 180'meridian at the Bering
Strait, Tonga and other islands to prevent confusion
of day and date in some of the island groups that are
cut through by the meridian. Some of them keep
Asiatic or New Zealand standard time, others follow
the American date and time. The International Date
Line is shown in Fig. 1.21.
Great Circle Routes
Since the Earth is spherical in shape, the shortest
distance between any two points on the globe lies
along its circumference. There are an infinite num-
ber of great circles of equal length running around
the globe, e.g. the circle formed by the Greenwich
Meridian and the 180' meridian (PQ); the circle
formed by the 130'W and 50' E meridians (XY)' Of
the lines of latitude, only the equator AB is a great
circle (Fig. 1.22).
When drawn on a globe great circles appear as
straight lines, but when they are drawn on flat maps
Fig. 1.22 The Great Circles
Fig. 1.23 The Great Circle air-routes
Mexico City
Fig. 1.21 The International Date Line
*oqlH ArtEH rcA
A
,!rF \
,/-r?-..1\
(\\J
V
300,ooo,ooo
STOCKHOLM
t4
sla Lumpu]

of the world they may not appear so. In fact on many
maps great circles appear curved and routes follow-
ing them seem to be much longer than routes along
a straight line joining two places. This is an illusion
created by the distortion of the shape of the earth
to allow it to be drawn on a flat map.
Modern aircraft follow routes along sections of
great circles for speedy long-distance flights and thus
cut down flying time. But it is not always possible to
follow great circle routes. Firstly, air routes must
link numerous cities and thus planes proceed in short
'hops'from place to place; secondly, it may be impos-
sible to fly along great circles for political reasons if
O,uestions and Exercises
1. With the aid of annotated diagrams, attempt to
prove that the earth is spherical. Give as many
reasons as you can.
2. Explain with the aid of fairly accurate diagrams,
how the tilt of the earth's axis on its orbital plane
around the sun causes:
(a) the seasons;
(b) the variations in the length of day and
night;
(c) the altitude of the midday sun to change
at different times of the year.
3. Explain the differences between any three of
the following:
(a) perihelion and aphelion;
(b) parallels of latitude and meridians of lon-
gitude;
(c) the earth's rotation and the earth's revo-
lution;
(d) solstice and equinox:
(e) Standard Time and Greenwich Mean
Time.
4. Explain any three of the following terms con-
nected with the earth and its planetary relations:
(a) galaxy;
(b) Prime Meridianl
(c) elliptical orbit;
(d) International Date Line.
some countries forbid the use of their air-space;
thirdly, air routes tend to follow the land in case of
accident and rarely fly for long distances over the
sea. However, where long distances have to be cov-
ered over uninhibited regions, great circle routes are
the quickest. They are therefore used in crossing
polar regions. Some of the major great circle routes
over the pole include that from London to Vancou-
ver or Los Angeles, t-hat from Tokyo to Stockholm
and that from Tokyo to Mexico City (Fig. 1.23).
Polar routes are not only quicker but also relieve
air-traffic congestion on the very crowded conven-
tional routes.
5. Either: Give an explanatory account of the fol-
lowing:
(a) Daylight increases as we go polewards in
summer in the northern hemisphere.
(b) The period of twilight in Britain is longer
than in Malaysia.
(c) A ship crossing the International Date
Line at midnight on Wednesday eastwards
finds that it is midnight, Tuesday, on the
American side.
Or: Work out the following:
(a) What is the approximate distance in a
straight line between Cairo (lat. 30" 0' N,
long. 31' 5' E and Durban (lat. 29" 57' S,
long. 30o 59' E)?
(b) When it is 2:ffi p.m. in Greenwich, what
is the local time of:
i. Sydney (long. 151" E);
ii. Chicago (long. 87" 30' W);
iii. Kuala Kangsar (long. 101" E).
(c) The captain of a ship observed that it was
local noon. He turned on the radio and
listened to the 7.00 a.m. BBC news. What
was his longitude?

Sample Objective Ouestions
1. Moscow and Nairobi are on the
same line of longitude (37'E), it can
thus be deduced that
A they are of equal distance from
the equator
B they have similar hours of day
light on 21 June
C they have noon at the same time
D dawn is of the same duration in
both places
2. The World Cup Final between West
Germany and Holland was played at
Munich (Longitude ll"E) at 5.00
p.m. on 7 July 1974. What was
mathematically the local time in
Kuala Lumpur, Malaysia (Longitude
102"E) when it was televised live?
A 11.01 a.m. 6 July
B 11.04 p.m. 7 July
C 6.34 p.m. 7 July
D 10.30 p.m. 8 July
3. Which of the following statements
is incorrect?
A The Earth and the other Planets
revolve round the Sun
B The degree of longitude de-
creases in length towards the
poles
C Of the lines of latitude, only the
equator is a great circle
D All countries have one standard
time zone
4. The captain of an ocean liner ob-
served that the longitude of his ship
was 75'W. When the time in London
is 11 00 hours (11.00 a.m.), the time
in the liner would be
5.
A 500 hours (5 a.m.)
B 15 00 hours (3 p.m.)
C 600 hours (6 a.m.)
D 16 00 hours (4 p.m.)
All parallels of latitude
A are parallel to the equator
B converge at the poles
C increase in their distance towards
the poles
D make right angles with the centre
of the earth
The sun is overhead at noon along
the laritude 18"N
A at the winter solstice, i.e. 22 De-
cember
B at the summer solstice, i.e. 21
June
C at the equinoxes
D between 2l March and 21 June
When it is 4.00 p.m. in Kuala Lum-
pur, it is 4.30 p.m. in Manila, 5.30
p.m. in Tokyo and 8.30 p.m. in Wel-
lington. This is because
A of their differences in latitude
B the Earth rotates from east to
west
C the cities are located in different
time zones
D Kuala Lumpur experiences lon-
ger daylight than Wellington
The solar eclipse occurs
A when the Earth comes between
the Moon and the Sun
B when the Moon comes between
the Sun and the Earth
C when the Earth is obscured bY
Mars
D immediately after a lunar eclipse
9. The following simplified diagram
shows the annual movement of the
sun. The important latitudes
(Equator, Tropic of Cancer, Tropic
of Capricorn) are indicated. Which
position marked shows the summer
solstice (21st June) for the northern
hemisphere?
10. Which statement is incorrect?
A The solar system comprises the
Sun, the nine planets and their
satellites
b The circular horizon of the Earth
widens as altitude increases
C The Earth has two movements: it
rotates on its own axis and re-
volves round the sun
D Dawn and twilight is longer in
temperate zones as opposed to
tropical regions
11. On 2lst March, Alaska (U.S.A.) ex-
periences
A longer days and shorter nights
B equal days and nighr
C 24 hours of daylight
D long nights and short days
7.
8.
l6

