Chapter 21 The Warm Temperate Eastern
Margin (China Type) Climate
Distribution
This type of climate is found on the eastern margins
of continents in warm temperate latitudes, just out-
side the tropics (Fig.21.1). It has comparatively
more rainfall than the Mediterranean climate in the
same latitudes, coming mainly in the summer. It is,
in fact, the climate of most parts of China-a modi-
fied form of monsoonal climate. It is thus also called
the Temperate Monsoon or China Type of climate.
In south-eastern U.S.A., bordering the Gulf of Mex-
ico, continental heating in summer induces an inflow
of air from the cooler Atlantic Ocean. Though less
pronounced, the overall climatic features resemble
those of the China type. It is sometimes referred to
as the Gulf type of climate.
In the southern hemisphere, this kind of climate
is experienced along the warm temperate eastern
Fig.2'1.1 Regions with a Warm Temperate Eastern Margin
Climate
coastlands of all the three continents: in New South
Wales with its eucalyptus forests; in Natal where
sugar-cane thrives; and in the maize belt of the Par-
ana-Paraguay-Uruguay basin. As the regions are
influenced by the onshore Trade Winds all the year
round, without any monsoon variations, the climate
cannot be described as temperate monsoon. It is
sometimes referred to as the Natal type of climate.
Climate
The Warm Temperate Eastern Margin Climate is
typified by a warm moist summer and a cool, dry
winter. The mean monthly temperature varies
between 4 'C (40 'F) and 26 'C (78 'F) and is strongly
modified by maritime influence. Occasionally, the
penetration of cold air from the continental interiors
may bring down the temperature to freezing point.
-.+
a'tY
23fS
- T'-
f
IT
I
I
Scale 1: 215000000

Though frosts are rare, they occasionally occur in
the colder interiors. For most of the time, it is pleas-
antly warm. The relative humidity is a little high in
mid-summer when the heat becomes oppressive and
can be very trying to the white settlers, e.g. in Natal.
Rainfall is more than moderate, ranging from
635 mm (25 inches) to 1.524 mm (60 inches). This is
adequate for all agricultural purposes and the Warm
Temperate Eastern Margin Climate supports a wide
range of crops. Areas which experience this climate
are very densely populated. Another important fea-
ture is the fairly uniform distribution of rainfall
throughout the year. There is rain every month,
except in the interior of central China, where there
is a distinct dry season. Rain comes either from con,
vectional sources or as orographic rain in summer, or
from depressions in prolonged showers in winter.
Local storms, e.g. typhoons and hurricanes, also
occur.
There is a good deal of variation in detail within
the eastern margins and it is essential to examine
them by reference to specific areas, where the local
factors affect the climates. We shall subdivide them
into three main types.
1. The China type: central and north China, includ-
ing southern Japan (temperate monsoonal).
2. The Gulf type: south-eastern United States
(slight-monsoonal).
3. The Natal type: all the warm temperate eastern
margin (non-monsoonal areas) of the southern hem-
isphere including Natal, eastern Australia and
southern Brazil-Paraguay-Uruguay and northern
Argentina.
l. The China type. This is the most typical climate
of the warm temperate eastern margin. The great
land mass of the Asiatic continent with its moun-
tainous interior induces great pressure changes
between summer and winter. Intense heating in 'the
heart of Asia' sets up a region of low pressure in
summer and the tropical Pacific air stream is drawn
in as the rain-bearing South-East Monsoon. Heavy
precipitation occurs in most parts of China, decreas-
ing inland. As illustrated in Fig. 2I.2(a), the wettest
months of Nanjing (Nanking) are in summer with
more than a third of the annual rainfall falling in
June and July (389 mm out of 1 067 mm/15.3 inches
out of 42 inches), though the monsoon does not
'burst, as suddenly, nor does the rain 'pour' as heav-
ily as in India. In winter, a steep pressure gradient
is set up between the cold interiors of Mongolia and
Siberia and the warmer Pacific coastlands. The con-
tinental polar air stream flows outwards as the
North-West Monsoon, bitterly cold and very dry.
There is little rain but considerable snow on the
windward slopes of Shandong (Shantung) as the cold
winds are warmed and moistened. In fact, less than
210 mm (8.4 inches) are recorded in Nanjing (Nan-
king) during the cold season from October to Feb-
ruary. Another characteristic feature of the China-
type of eastern margin climate is the great annual
temperature range. As shown in the temperature
graph of Nanjing (Nanking), there is a difference of
25 "C (45 "F) between JuJy (27 "C/81 "F) and January
(2'Cl36'F). Further north, the range is even
greater, 31 "C (55 'F) in Beijing (Peking), and 30'C
(54'F) in Changan. In the warmer south and along the
coast, the temperature differences are much less, e.g.
'1.6 "C(28'F) in Guangzhou (Canton) 15 'C (27 'F) in
Shantou (Swatow) and only tz'C (22 "F) in Hong
Kong.
Another climatic feature associated with the
China type of climate in southern China is the occur-
rence of typhoons-intense tropical cyclones that
originate in the Pacific Ocean, and move westwards
to the coastlands bordering the South China Sea.
They are most frequent in'late summer, from July
Fi1.21.2(al
Warm Temperature Eastern Margin Climate in the northern
hemisphere (China-type)
Place: Nanjing (Nanking). China (32" N. 119'E)
Altitude: 1 0 metres (34 feet)
Annual precipitationl 1 067 mm (42 inchesl
Annual temperature range: 25 "C (27'-2 "Cy45 "F (81"-36 "F)
32190
27180
21170
16/60
| 10/50
-1l30
25t1
0/0
MJ J A
months
.;
Arr
!Eo
6^-
Eo
N.niing :
Temp. "c:
Precip. {mm):
(anch€s):
JFMAMJJASON
2 4 8 14 2124 21 27 2311 
36 39 47 58 69 76 81 81 73 63 5l
41 51 76 102 82 183 206 117 94 51 4l
t.6 20 3.0 4.O 3'2 72 8'1 46 37 2'0 l6
D 
rangE/total
25'c
40 45"F.
3O I 067 mm
l 2 42 inches

to September and can be very disastrous. The winds
blow with tremendous strength, the sky is overcast
and there are torrential downpours. As much as
610 mm (24 inches) in a day have been recorded and
flogding is widespread. In the Shantou (Swatow)
typhoon of August 1922, the huge waves set up by
the violent typhoon drowned as many as 50 000
inhabitants.
2. The Gulf type. The Gulf-Atlantic regions of the
United States experience a type of climate similar to
that of central China except that the monsoonal
characteristics are less well established. There is no
complete seasonal wind reversal; for the pressure
gradient between mainland America and the Atlan-
tic Ocean is less marked. As can be seen from the
graph in Fig. 2t.2(b) for Miami, Florida, the differ-
ence in temperature between mid-summer
(28"C182"F) and mid-winter (January, 20'Cl68'F)
is only 8 "C (14 "F). The warm Gulf Stream and the
onshore Trade Winds help to bring about this nar-
row range of temperature. Summers are warm and
pleasant. Miami, being an important holiday resort,
rarely snows in winter.
Fis. 21.2(bl
Warm Temperate Eastern Margin Climate in the northern
hemisphere (Gulf-type)
Place: Miami, Florida, U.S.A. (26'N,80.W)
Altitude: 1,5 metres (5 feet)
Annual precipitation: 1 500 mm (5g inches)
Annualtemperature range: 8 'C (28 "-20.C1/14.F (82 .- 68 .F)
38/100
32190
27t80
21170
16/60
10/50
4tN
The annual rainfall is heavy with 1 499 mm (59
inches) in Miami and New Orleans; | 321 mm (52
inches) in Montgomery and 1 041 mm (41 inches) in
Charleston. There is no distinct dry period as in the
monsoon lands, and the abundant moisture has stim-
ulated extensive cultivation of cotton and maize in
the Cotton and Corn Belts both of which are the
world's leading areas for these crops. From the rain-
fall pattern in Fig. 21.2(b), it is clear that there is a
tendency towards a summer maximum, brought by
the onshore Trade Winds which swing landwards
from the Atlantic. The amount of rain is increased
by the frequent thunderstorms in summer and by
hurricanes in September and October.
Some stations, e.g. Montgomery in Alabama, also
show a secondary maximum in late winter when
cyclonic activities are greatest. Sometimes, violent
tornadoes occur, due to intense local heating on
land. Though these whirling storms follow only a
narrow path in the central plain (Mississippi basin),
they leave behind a trail of destruction.
3. The Natal type. There are three distinct areas on
the eastern coasts of the southern continents, lying
just south of the Tropic of Capricorn which experi-
ence this type of climate. The narrowness of the con-
tinents and the dominance of maritime influence
eliminate the monsoonal elements which character-
ize the corresponding climates of the northern hem-
isphere. The South-East Trade Winds bring about
a more even distribution of rainfall throughout the
year as illustrated by the climatic graph for Sydney,
Australia. It has a mean monthly precipitation of
102 mm (4 inches), which is adequate for tnost
agricultural activities. The annual amount of
1 219 mm (48 inches) is fairly representative of this
climatic type in the southern hemisphere. The
annual precipitation of Durban in Natal is 1 143 mm
(45 inches) and that of Asuncion in Paraguay is
1 320 mm (52 inches). The passage of depressions
across the southern edges of the warm temperate
eastern margins results in a slight autumn or winter
maximum, typified by Sydney (Fig.2I.2c) which has
its wettest months in March, April, May, June and
July (the autumn-winter part of the year). The rain
comes in prolonged showers. Much of the water
seeps into the ground and there is little run-off, so
the regions are well suited to agriculture and are
some of the best settled parts of the southern con-
tinents.
Another feature to note is the small annual tem-
perature range, without any really cold months. The
annual range for Sydney is L0'C (19'F) and the cold-
-o
=.E
EE
22919
2o,318
17817
1s216
12715
10214
0/0
.g
o3r'
foo
FD
E'
o
JFMAMJJASOND
months
Maami: 
J
Temp. "C: 
"r., 
Precip. (mml: 64
(inchsl: 2.5
FMAMJJASON
20 22 23 25 27 2a 2A 27 26 23
6€1174118082A2e17873
48 58 86 180 188 r35 163 226 229 84
r.9 2.3 3.4 1.1 7.4 5'3 6.4 8.9 9.0 3.3
D 
range/lotal
21 8"c
69 r4"F.
43 1 499 mm
l 7 59 inch6

27180
21170
16/60
10/50
152t6
12715
10214
o/o
JFMAMJJA
months
Sydney:JFMAMJ
Temp.'c: 
22 22 21 1g t5 
"r.: 
i2 71 69 65 59 55
Precip.(mm): g 
1Og 122 142 13O 122
(inches):3.7 43 4.8 5.6 5l 
4.8
JASONDrange/toral
12 13 15 18 l9 21 lo'C
53 55 59 64 67 70 19'F.
122 76 14 81 71 74 
12l9hm
48 30 2.9 32 28 2'9 43inches
Fig. 21.2(c)
Warm Temperate Eastern Margin Climate in the southern
hemisphere (Natal-type)
Place: Sydney, New South Wales, Australia (34.S, 151"E)
Altitude: 42 metres (138 feet)
Annual precipitation: 1 219 m (48 inches)
An nua I tem peratu re ra nge : 1 0'C (22" - 1 2"Cl / 19"F (j 2. - 53" Fl
est month is 12'C (53 "F). The range is smaller for
Durban, only 7'C (13 "F), with July, the coldest
month at 17 "C (63 'F). In Asuncion, it is even less,
the range is only 4 "C (8 "F), and the climate is pleas-
antly warm all the time.
However, the southern continents also have vio-
lent local storms, which though not as severe as the
typhoon, hurricane or tornado, are nevertheless,
quite significant. The Southerly Burster, a violent
cold wind blowing along the coast of New South
Wales, leads to a sudden fall in temperature. It is
most frequent in spring and summer. The corre-
sponding cold wind in Argentina and Uruguay is the
Pampero, which is often accompanied by thunder
and lightning besides the rain and dust. In south-
eastern Africa, a hot, dry wind called the Berg Wind
comes down from the interior plateau. It is compa-
rable to the Frihn or Chinook, and brings unpleas-
antly high temperatures and oppressive weather.
Natural Vegetation
The eastern margins of warm temperate latitudes
have a much heavier rainfall (between 890 mm and
I 400 mm/35 inches and 55 inches) than either the
western margins or the continental interiors and thus
have a luxuriant vegetation. The forests are of a
mixed nature. The lowlands carry both evergreen
broad-leaved forests and deciduous trees quite sim-
ilar to those of the tropical monsoon forests. On the
highlands are various species of conifers such as
pines and cypresses which are important softwoods.
As the perennial plant growth is not checked by
either a dry season as in the Mediterranean, or a
cold season as in the cool temperate regions, con-
ditions are well suited to a rich variety of plant life
including grass, ferns, lianas, bamboos, palms and
forests. The well distributed rainfall all the year
round makes the regions look green at all times.
It is interesting to note that the warm temperate
eastern margins are the homes of a number of valu-
able timber species. In eastern Australia,the most
important are eucalyptus trees, with scanty foliage
and thick fern undergrowth. Some of the eucalyptus
are very tall, over 76 metres (250 feet) and they
make hardy timber. The Australian Alps of Victoria
and the Blue Mountains of New South Wales have
great reserves of temperate eucalyptus forests that
make up part of the timber exports of Australia.
From the forests of south-eastern Brazil, eastern
Paraguay, north-eastern Argentina come valuable
warm temperate timbers such as the Parana pine,
the quebracho (axe-breaker, an extremely hard
wood used for tanning) and the wild yerba mat6
trees, from which the leaves are gathered for making
Paraguay tea. Today, large yerba mat€ plantations
have been established to produce Paraguay tea, an
increasingly important export item of Paraguay. In
Natal, the warm Mozambique current encourages
heavy precipitation along the coast and many species
of palm trees thrive. The highlands yield extensive
forests of chestnuts. ironwood and blackwoods. An
unusual occupation is the commercial cultivation of
wattle trees in plantations for tanning extracts and
for use in Natal's coal mines as pit-props.
The forests of China and southern Japan dlso have
considerable economic value and include oak, cam-
phor, camelia and magnolia. Unfortunately the tre-
mendous population pressure in the two countries
has caused much of the original forest to be cleared
for fuel or crop cultivation. Deforestation has
resulted in many barren hill slopes that are still feel-
ing the impact of soil erosion. The Gulf states of the
U.S.A. have lowland deciduous forests. The trees
grow close together with thick undergrowth and
leafy branches. Walnut, oak, hickory and maple are
-o
-9
=L
EE
.;
i r!'
PoLd
E-
o
D
I-4v2

some of the more common species, while in the
more sandy regions pines are grown. Much of the
forest cover has given way to the cultivation of sub-
tropical crops like cotton, maize and fruits.
Economic Development
The warm temperate eastern margins are the most
productive parts of the middle latitudes. There is
adequate rainfall, no prolonged drought, and the
cold season is warm enough for most crops to sur-
vive. Thus the growing season is almost continuous,
though summer is the busiest part of the farming
year. Monsoon China together with southern Japan
and other parts of the eastern margin climatic zone
accounts for almost a third of the world population.
Food has to be raised to feed the teeming popula-
tion. The hills are terraced, fields are irrigated, and
agriculture is extended to the limits of production.
It is no exaggeration to say that the temperate mon-
soon lands are the most intensively tilled parts of the
earth. Besides the widespread cultivation of maize
and cotton in the Corn and Cotton Belts of the
U.S.A., fruit and tobacco are also grown. Rice, tea
21.4 Multicropping in Japan: rice is grown on the plains
and tea cultivated on hill slopes. Popperloto
and mulberries are extensively grown in Monsoon
China. Elsewhere are found other products of eco-
nomic ir.nportance, e.g. cane sugar in Natal, coffee
and maize in South America and dairying in New
South Wales and Victoria. Let us now examine some
of the regions more closely.
l. Farming in Monsoon China. Undoubtedly this is
the world's greatest rice-growing area. A third of
the world's rice is grown in China, though the huge
population of 980 million leaves very little for
export. In fact, in normal years, imports of rice and
other food grains are essential. The Chinese peas-
ants raise 'wet padi' or'swamp rice' in flooded fields
that call for endless hard labour for the greater part
of the year. It is said that nowhere else is there so
much manual labour devoted to raise a food crop
that gives so little economic return. Farming is usu-
ally on a subsistence basis. Despite increasing mech-
anization in padi-cultivation, very few farmers
actually make use of new machines because they are
expensive and may be impractical in some areas.
The only progress that has been made is towards
double or treble cropping, which has increased the
annual total rice production. When compared with

the rapid population growth of the rice-eating
nations, the increased production has in no way
relieved the critical food problem of Monsoon Asia.
Furthermore, milled rice which forms the staple food
of the Orient is a seriously deficient diet; the people
are therefore not only inadequately fed but also
physically undernourished (Plate 2I.A).
Monsoon China has all the ideal conditions for
padi cultivation; a warm climate, moderately wet
throughout the year, and extensive lowlands with
fertile moisture-retentive alluvial soil, which if nec-
essary, can be easily irrigated. The land has been
tilled from generation to generation, and yet there
is little deterioration in soil fertility. The muddy
irrigation water from the river basins is silty and con-
stantly brings new soil to the fields. The soil is
greatly enriched during floods, though these are far
less frequent now, with the improvement made in
flood control by the Communist r6gime. In practice,
the Chinese peasants add all kinds of organic wastes
to enrich their fields. Rice straw, ashes, clippings,
animal dung, refuse, and last but not least, human
manure.
The most intensively farmed areas are the basins
of the Xi Jiang (Si Kiang), Chang Jiang (Yangtze
Kiang) and Huang He (Hwang Ho), which are also
the most densely peopled areas. The eastern coast-
lands are equally important. As the flat lands are
insufficient for rice cultivation, farmers move up the
hill slopes and grow padi on terraced uplands. The
artificial terraces retain the excess water as it flows
down the slope. Besides rice the other important
crops are tea, grown for home consumption and
mulberry leaves gathered for feeding silkworms,
though sericulture is declining. (Also see Chapter
26, page 248 'Intensive subsistence farming'.)
2. Agriculture in the Gulf states. Agriculture in the
Gulf states of America differs from that of Monsoon
China, though they have a similar climate. Lack of
population pressure and the urge to export, make
rice cultivation a relatively unimportant occupation.
It is grown only in a few areas in the southern coast-
lands of the Mississippi delta. Americans are bread-
eaters and one can well imagine how insignificant
rice is in the economy of the Gulf states. The most
important crops are corn, cotton and tobacco.
(a) Corn. The chief food crop raised is, in fact
corn or maize. The humid air, the sunny summer and
the heavy showers suit the crop well. It is grown
right from the Gulf coast to the Mid-west south of
the Great Lakes, with the greatest concentration in
the Corn Belt of Nebraska. Iowa. Indiana and Ohio.
The region accounts for more than half the world's
production of corn, but only 3 per cent of the world's
exports. This is because most of the corn is used for
fattening animals, mostly cattle and pigs. Many
farmers do not harvest the corn but instead allow the
cattle or pigs 'to hog the corn down'in the field itself.
The fattened animals are then sold to the meat plants
in Chicago and Cincinnati to be slaughtered and
processed into 'corned beef' or frozen and chilled
beef. Very little corn is consumed as a staple food
in America, though the cereal originated in America
as the food crop of the native Indian people. Apart
from its ease of cultivation, in respect of soil, cli-
matic and labour requirements, corn's most out-
standing feature is its prolific yield. It gives almost
twice as much food (mainly starch) per hectare as
wheat or other cereals. This explains why it is so
widely cultivated in both the warm temperate and
the tropical latitudes.
(b) Couon. Of the cash crops grown in the Gulf
states, none is comparable with cotton (Fig. 21.3).
In the Deep South, the fibre is so vital to the eco-
nomic well-being of the southerners that 'cotton is
king'! It shapes the destiny of the southern states,
being directly responsible for their trade, prosperity
and politics. In the early days of America, millions
of Negroes wOre brought from Africa as slave labour
for the cotton plantations, because the climate was
too hot for the white settlers to harvest the cotton
themselves. Although slavery was abolished in the
nineteenth century, the Negroes are still poor and
under-privileged. This is the cause of the present
problems between the blacks and the whites in
America.
Fig.21.3 Cotton bolls

21.8 U.S.A. is not the only important cotton producer.
India's largest industry is cotton textiles. Here yarn is being
processed at the Birla mills. New Delhi Press lnformation
Bureau, lndia
The Gulf type of climate is undoubtedly the best
for cotton growing. Its long, hot growing season with
200 frost-free days and a moderately high tempera-
ture of about 24 "C (75 "F) permits the crop to grow
slowly and mature within six months. Like most
fibres, cotton likes ample rain and an annual precip-
itation of around 1 0L6 mm (40 inches) is essential.
In fact, an adequate moisture supply coming from
frequent light showers with bright sunshine between
them gives the highest yield. Fine quality cotton also
comes from irrigated fields in the drier west provided
sufficient water is supplied during the growing sea-
son. The Cotton Belt is thus limited by the 508 mm
(20 inch) isohyet on the west and the 25 "C (77 "F)
isotherm in the north, within which there are at least
200 days without frost. In the very south, in the
Gulf-lands, the heavy rainfall damages the lint. This
area is therefore less suitable for cotton and is
devoted to citrus fruits, sugar-cane and market-gar-
dening, as in Florida. The commercial cultivation of
cotton is now concentrated only in the most favour-
able areas which are the Mississippi flood plains, the
clayey Atlantic coastlands of Georgia and South
Carolina, the Black Prairies of Texas and the Red
Prairies of Oklahoma. Fig. 21.4 shows the chief cot-
ton areas.
Generally speaking, the best cotton comes from
the maritime districts where the sea breezes and the
warming effect of the ocean are most strongly felt.
The Sea Island Cotton grown in the islands off the
coast of Georgia and South Carolina is long-stapled
(the fibres are between 38 and 58 mrry'1.5 and 2.3
inches in length) and is the best in the world. Further
inland, the staples are shorter (about 25 mm/l inch
long). This is typical of the bulk of the 'American
cotton'. Besides the problem of soil exhaustion and
erosion caused by prolonged cotton cultivation, the
most dreaded enemy of the Cotton Belt is the boll-
weevil. The pest multiplies so rapidly that a pair of
boll-weevils, if left unchecked, will breed over 10
million grubs within a single season! The pest is
Fig. 21.4 The Cotton Belt of
the U.S.A.
- \ro5,
.p{ x \'"uu
,,r,, o,"oo rftI"..-.ff'
xxXXxfriii# x
WHEAT BELT
CORN BELT
xlxxx
BELi-------
Gulf ol Mexico
km 
tl0 
miles 25O
2M

Fig. 21.5 The boll-weevil
Fig. 21.6 A tobacco plant
responsible for the westward migration of the Cotton
Belt. When it first appeared in 1892 in the eastern
U.S.A., it attacked the Sea Island Cotton. Aerial
spraying with insecticides and the thorough burning
of old cotton stalks, have been found effective in
eliminating the boll-weevil (Fig. 21.5).
(c) Tobacco. Another interesting crop closely
associated with the Gulf type of climate is tobacco,
which incidentally is also a native crop of America
(Fig.21.6). Though it is cultivated in many parts of
the world, and the finished products range from
Turkish tobacco to Havana cigars and Malaysian
cheroots, there is none so universally known as the
Virginia tobacco. It is the raw material from which
most of the world's cigarettes are blended to suit the
smokers' taste. The humid atmosphere, the warmth
and the well-drained soils of the Gulf states, eqable
tobacco to be successfully cultivated in many of the
eastern states of the U.S.A., e.g. Virginia, Mary-
land, Georgia, North and South Carolina, Kentucky
and Tennessee. No less than half the tobacco that
enters international trade comes from these states.
Regardless of the views that doctors may hold, cigar
and cigarette-smoking has long been a universal
habit that cannot be dispensed with by many. It is
the basis of an industry and provides, through duty,
a valuable source of income to the government.
3. Crop cultivation in the eastern margins of the
southern hemisphere. A close look at the economic
map of the southern hemisphere will at once reveal
the agricultural importance of its eastern margins
which experience a Natal type of climate. The warm
moist summers and frost-free winters not only sup-
port many crops but also animals. In the coastlands
of Natal, sugar-cane is the dominant crop, followed
by cotton and tobacco in the interior. Recent expan-
sion of these crops has come about with improved
irrigation. Maize is extensively cultivated for use
both as 'mealies', an important food item for Afri-
cans and 'silage', an animal fodder for cattle rearing.
But in comparison with the maize yield of the Corn
Belt of the U.S.A., the African yield is rather low,
often only half. Improvements can be made, if farm-
ers attempt some form of crop rotation to arrest the
rapid rate of soil exhaustion in regions of maize mon-
oculture. Scientific manuring and better methods of
cultivation would raise yields.
In South America where rainfall is less than
1 016 mm (40 inches), there is much grassland on
which many cattle and sheep are kept for meat, wool
and hides. It is actually the continuation of the
Argentinian Pampas. The mild winters mean that
the animals can be kept out-of-doors all the time.
The extensive natural pastures provide valuable for-
age for both cattle and sheep. The products from
these two kinds of domesticated animals account for
over three-quarters of the annual exports of Uru-
guay. The remaining exports come mainly from
wheat and.flax. Further north in southern Brazil, the
rainfall increases to more than L 016 mm (40 inches)
and forest gradually replaces grass. Here the impor-
tant occupations are the cultivation of. yerba mat1
(Paraguay tea) and the lumbering of araucaria or
Parana pine. Cattle and sheep are reared, and maize
and sugar-cane are grown.
In eastern Australia, the moist Trade Winds bring
heavy rainfall to the coastal districts and these are
thickly wooded. Giant eucalyptus trees rise one
above the other right up.the Eastern Highlands. But
with the influx of European immigrants, much of the
forest has been cleared for settlement and dairying.
The eastern margin of New South Wales was, in fact,
the earliest part of the continent to be colonized,
beginning with Port Jackson, the present site of Syd-
ney. The region is now the chief source of Aus-
tralia's milk, butter and cheese, besides cotton,
sugar-cane and maize which are increasingly grown
in the north.

Ouestions and Exercises
1. What do you understand by the China type of
climate? Locate on a world map the regions
which experience this type of climate, and
describe the broad pattern of their agricultural
activities.
2. Describe the main factors which affect the cli-
mate and vegetation of any three of the follow-
ing regions:
(a) the Gulf states of U.S.A.;
(b) the Iberian peninsula;
(c) Borneo;
(d) Tasmania;
(e) Sri Lanka.
3. Give a reasoned account of any two of the fol-
lowing:
(a) Cotton cultivation in the United States of
America;
(b) Padi growing in Monsoon China;
(c) Dairying in eastern Australia;
(d) Lumbering in Canada.
Give an explanatory account of any three of the
following:
(a) Local storms e.g. typhoon, hurricane,
pampero are often associated with the
Warm Temperate Eastern Margin Climate.
(b) The predominant forest trees of eastern
Australia are eucalyptus.
(c) U.S.A. accounts for more than 50 per cent
of world production of corn (i.e. maize) but
only 3 per cent of world exports.
(d) Farming in Monsoon China is usually on a
subsistence basis, and the peasants are per-
manently'land-hungry'.
Analyse, in relation to latitude and other geog-
raphical factors, the following climatic figures:
Mean
luly
Temp.
28"C (82'F.)
8'C (46'F.)
27'C (81'F.)
Annual
Temp.
Range
2'C (3.2"F.)
l2"c (21"F.)
24'C (43'F)
Annual
Rainfall
2 4l6mm
(95.1 in.)
361 mm (14.2 in.)
1 135 mm(44.7 in.)
China type of climate in Agentina is
A Hurricane
B Mistral
C Sirocco
D Pampero
5. Some of the better known species of
trees found in the China type of cli-
mate include these except
A camphor
B camelia
C mahogany
D magnolia
4.
5.
Station
Location
Altitude
10 m (33 feet)
518 m (1,700 feet)
7 m (23 feet)
Mean
January
Temp.
26"C (78.8"F.)
1e'c (67"F.)
3'C (38'F.)
Singapore l"N, 104"E
Santiago 33'S, 7l'W
Shanghai 31'N, 121"E
Sample Objective Ouestions
1. The warm temperate China type of
climate is confined to
A eastern parts of the continents
B the tropics
C mainland China
D the northern hemisphere
2. The warm, wet eastern margin Chi-
na type of climate supports good
vegetative growth of both forests
and grass. Some of the local vegeta-
tive species include these but nol
A quebracho
B parana pine
C spinifex grass
D eucalyptus trees
3. Examine photograph 21.A on page
202 which shows a typical farming
scene in Japan. The features which
support the view that farming here is
intensive arc lhese except
A irrigated farm plots
B terraced hill slopes
C hand-picked tea leaves
D rugged relief
4. The local wind which influences the

