Chapter 18 The Hot Desert and Mid-Latitude
Desert Climate
Distribution
Deserts are regions of scanty rainfall which may be
hot like the hot deserts of the Saharan type; or tem'
perate as are the mid-latitude deserts like the Gobi.
The aridity of the hot deserts is mainly due to the
effects of off-shore Trade Winds, hence they are also
called Trade Wind Deserts. The temperate deserts
are rainless because of their interior location in the
temperate latitudes, well away from the rain-bearing
winds.
The major hot deserts of the world are located on
the western coasts of continents between latitudes
15" and 30" N and S as shown in Fig. 18.1. They
include the Sahara Desert, the largest single stretch
of desert, which is 5 150.km (3,2N miles) from east
to west and at least 1 600 km (1,000 miles) wide. Its
total area of 9 million sq. km (3.5 million square
miles) is larger than all the 50 states of the U.S.A.
put together. The next biggest desert is the Great
Australian Desert which covers almost half of the
continent. The other hot deserts are the Arabian
Desert, Iranian Desert, Thar Desert, Kalahari and
Namib Deserts. In North America, the desert
extends from Mexico into the U.S.A. and is called
by different names at different places, e.g. the
Mohave, Sonoran, Californian and Mexican Des-
erts. In South America. the Atacama or Peruvian
Desert is the driest of all deserts with less than
13 mm (0.5 inches) of rainfall annually.
Amongst the mid-latitude deserts, many are found
on plateaux and are at a considerable distance from
the sea. These are the Gobi. Turkestan and Pata-
gonian Deserts. The Patagonian Desert is more due
to its rain-shadow position on the leeward side of the
lofty Andes than to continentality.
Fig. 18.1 The hot deserts and mid-latitude deserts of the world
,*,#,,\
,i
-- -'i
Or!
E (D.'
ol.Ei
; E':
I
Ag$'gteqL--
r--1 sgld ocean currents
Scale: 1:21500O000
Atacama

Climate
Rainfall. Few deserts whether hot or mid-latitude
have an annual precipitation of more than 250 mm
(10 inches). For example, William Creek in Aus-
tralia has 137 mm (5.4 inches), Jacobabad in Pakis-
tan has 102 mm (4 inches), Yuma, Arizona, U.S.A.
has 84 mm (3.3 inches). In Salah in the mid-Sahara
and Arica in the mid-Atacama have practically no
rain at all. In the latter, less than 0.5 mm (0.02
inches) fell within a period of 17 years in three light
showers! In another station less than 240 km (150
miles) away at Iquique, not a single drop of rain was
recorded for four years and then a torrential down-
pour suddenly came one afternoon in which 63 mm
(2.5 inches) of rain fell! The aridity of deserts is the
most outstanding feature of the desert climate. We
shall examine more closely why they are so dry.
The hot deserts lie astride the Horse Latitudes or
the Sub-Tropical High Pressure Belts where the air
is descending, a condition least favourable for pre-
cipitation of any kind to take place. The rain-bearing
Trade Winds blow off-shore and the Westerlies that
are on-shore blow outside the desert limits. What-
ever winds reach the deserts blow from cooler to
warmer regions, and their relative humidity is low-
Fis.18.2(a)
The Hot Desert Climate
Place: Massawa, Ethiopia (16'N, 39'E)
Altitude: 20 metres (64 feet)
Annual precipitation: 150 mm (5.9 inches)
Annual temperature range: 9"C (35"-26'Cy17'F (95.-78.F)
-z llil J
51t2
0/0
AM
ered, making condensation almost impossible. There
is scarely any cloud in the continuous blue sky. The
relative humidity is extremely low, decreasing from
60 per cent in coastal districts to less than 30 per cent
in the desert interiors. Under such conditions, every
bit of moisture is evaporated and the deserts are thus
regions of permanent drought.
Precipitation is both scarce and most unreliable.
Coastal stations like Massawa on the Red Sea, as
illustrated in Fig. 18.2(a) receive light scattered
showers from the on-shore winds, amounting to
150 mm (5.9 inches) for the year. On the western
coasts, the presence of cold currents (indicated by
arrows in Fig. 18.1) gives rise to mists and fogs by
chilling the oncoming air. This air is later warmed
by contact with the hot land, and little rain falls.
The dessicating effect of the cold Peruvian Current
along the Chilean coast is so pronounced that the
mean annual rainfall for the Atacama Desert is not
more than 13 mm (0.5 inch)! Rain normally occurs
as violent thunderstorms of the convectional type.
It 'bursts' suddenly and pours continuously for a few
hours over small areas. Twenty-five millimetres'(1
inch) or more of rain may be recorded in one single
shower! The thunderstorm is so violent, and comes
so suddenly that it has drastic consequences on de-
sert landforms.
Temperature. The deserts are some of the hottest
spots on earth and have high temperatures through-
out the year. There is no cold season in the hot de-
serts and the average summer temperature is around
30 "C (86'F). The highest shade temperature re-
corded is 58 "C (136 "F) on the 13 September 1922 at
Al Azizia,40 km (25 miles) south of Tripoli, Libya,
in the Sahara. Days are unbearably hot, and in the
open barren sands, 77 "C (170 'F) is often recorded.
The reasons for the high temperatures are obvious-
a clear, cloudless sky, intense insolation, dry air
and a rapid rate of evaporation.
Coastal deserts by virtue of their maritime influ-
ence and the cooling effect of the cold currents have
much lower temperatures, e.g. Arica has a mean
annual temperature of 19'C (66'F), Iquique 18 "C
(65 'F), Walvis Bay, south-west Africa, only 17'C
(63 "F). The hottest months seldom rise beyond
2l "C (70 "F) and the annual temperature range is
equally small, e.g. 5 'C (9 'F) in Africa,5.5 'C (10 'F)
in lquique and 5.5 "C (10 "F) in Walvis Bay.
cE
=oc>
.FE
38/100
32t90
27180
21170
.g
f|r
{o "-
6(J
E
Massawa: 
J 'F 
l\4
Temp. C: 
26 26 21
'F.: 
78 79 8l
Precrp. (mm): 38 15 l5
(rnches): 1.5 06 06
29 31
84 88
0.8 0
JJ
months
JJ
92 95
ASOND
ASOND
34 33 32 30 27
94 92 89 86 8r
008r836
0 0 03 0.7 t.4
The desert interiors, however, experience much
ranqe^otar higher summer temperatures and the winter months
17_"_F are rather cold. For example In Salah, in the
lT'ilft. 
mid-Sahara, has a temperature of 37 'C (99 'F) in the

hottest month but only 13 "C (55 "F) in the coldest
month. The annual range is 24'C (44 'F). The range
for Yuma is 20 "C (36 "F) and for Jacobabad is 23 "C
(41 "F). In comparison, the station Massawa, illus-
trated in Fig. 18.2(a), located near the coast, facing
the Red Sea has only a moderate range of 9 "C (17
"F). Its hottest month is July with a mean tempera-
ture of 35'C (95 "F) and its coldest month is January
with a mean temperature of.26"C (78 "F).
The diurnal range of temperature in the desert is
very great. Intense insolation by day in a region of
dry air and no clouds causes the temperature to rise
with the sun. The barren ground is so intensely he-
ated that, by noon, particularly in summer, a read-
ing of 49'C (L20'F) is common. But as soon as the
sun sets, the land loses heat very quickly by radia-
tion, and the mercury column in the thermometer
drops to well below the mean temperature. A daily
temperature range of 17 'C to 22'C (30'to 40 oF) is
common, though in the Death Valley of California,
an exceptionally great diurnal range of 41 'C (74 'F)
has been recorded. Frosts may occur at night in
winter. These extremes of temperature make de-
sert living most trying. This explains why the desert
people wear thick gowns all day long, to protect
themselves from the glaring heat by day and chilling
frost by night, not to mention the sand grains that
are carried by the wind.
Glimatic Conditions in the Mid-Latitude
Deserts
The climatic conditions of the mid-latitude deserts
are in many ways similar to those of the hot deserts.
Aridity is the keynote. These inland basins lie
hundreds of kilometres fiom the sea, and are shel-
tered by the high mountains all around them. As a
result, they are cut off from the rain-bearing winds.
Occasionally depressions may penetrate the Asiatic
continental mass and bring light rainfall in winter,
or unexpected convectional storms may bless the
parched lands with brief showers in summer. For
example Kashi (Kashgar) in western China in the
Gobi Desert, as illustrated in Fig. 18.2(b), has most
of its 89 mm (3.5 inches) of annual precipitation in
the summer. Due to their coldness and elevation,
snow falls in winter.
From Fig. 18.2(b), it is clear that summers are very
hot with an average temperature of 27 "C (80 "F) in
July at Kashi (Kashgar) and winters are extremely
cold with two months below freezing point. The
annual range of temperature is 32 "C (58 "F) much
76t3
25t1
0/0
27180
21170
16/@
10/50
-1130
-4t20
.E
o
?L
Fo-
6(J
cro
Fo
JFMAMJJASOND
months
Kashgr:JFMAMJJASOND
Temp. "c: 
-5 l.t 8 
'16 21 25 27 24 21 't3 4 -3
"F.: 
22 g 41 61 10 7t 80 76 69 56 40 26
Precip.(mml: I 
0 5 5 20 l0 8 
18 8 0 0 
linches):03 0 02 0.2 0'8 0'4 03 07 03 0 O 02
range/total
32'c
58"F.
89 mm
3 5 inches
Fis.18.2(b)
The Mid-Latitude Desert Climate
Place: Kashi (Kashgar), China (39'N,76" E)
Altitude: 1 297 metres (4,255 feet)
Annual precipitation: 89 mm (3.5 inches)
Annual temperature range: 32 "C (27 'C- (- 5) 'Cy58 'F (80 "-
22'Fl
greater than that of the hot deserts. Continentality
accounts for these extremes in temperature. Winters
are often severe, freezing lakes and rivers, and
strong cold winds blow all the time. When the ice
thaws in early summer, floods occur in many places.
The greptest rnhibiting factors to settlement are the
winter cold and the permanent aridity, besides
remoteness from the sea.
Natural Vegetation
All deserts have some form of vegetation such as
grass, scrub, herbs, weeds, roots or bulbs. Though
they may not appear green and fresh all the time,
they lie dormant in the soil awaiting rain which
comes at irregular intervals or once in many years.
The environment, so lacking in moisture and so
excessive in heat, is most unfavourable for plant
growth and a significant vegetation cannot be
expected. But very rarely are there deserts where
nothing grows.
The predominant vegetation for both hot and mid-
latitude deserts is xerophytic or drought-resistant
sciub. This includes the bulbous cacti, thorny
bushes, long-rooted wiry grasses and scattered dwarf
.=o
FE
FE
t75

lpi
slr\
i'l'e"i
if.*';*..i
18.A Desert plants in Arizona: Desert plants take a variety of forms both above and under the ground. Giant cactus called
saguaro (middleground, left) and Barrel cactus (Middleground, right) appear together with the widespreading hedgehog
cactus (foreground, centre). Many other drought-resistant plants, usually prickly with thick skins and waxy surfaces, such as
the ocotillo (shown in betwen the saguaro and the Barrel cactus in the middleground), the primrose and threadplant (in the
foreground), are found with the cactus plants. They have long roots in search of water and other plant food.
acacias (Plate 18.A). Except for date palms in oases
and well-watered river courses trees are rare because
intense insolation, very low relative humidity, and
rapid radiation would dry out their foliage and kill
them. Along the western coastal deserts washed by
cold currents as in the Atacama Desert, the mists
and fogs, formed by the chilling of warm air over
cold currents, roll inland and nourish a thin cover of
vegetation.
Plants that exist in deserts have highly specialized
means of adapting themselves to the arid environ-
ment. Intense evaporation increases the salinity of
the soil so that the dissolved salts tend to accumulate
on the surface forming hard pans. There are plants
called halophytes (salt lovers) that are adapted to
survive in such saline conditions. Desert soils are
deficient in humus since there is little vegetation to
decay and the absence of moisture retards the rate
of decomposition. Plants, whether annuals or per-
ennials must struggle for survival against both aridity
and poor soil.
Most desert shrubs have long roots and are well
spaced out to gather moisture, and search for ground
water. Plants have few or no leaves and the foliage
is either waxy, leathery, hairy or needle-shaped to
reduce the loss of water through transpiration. Some
of them are entirely leafless, with pricks or thorns.
Others like the cacti have thick succulent stems to
store up water for long droughts. There are still oth-
ers that shed their leaves during droughts. The seeds
of many species of grasses and herbs have thick,
tough skins to protect them while they lie dormant.
r76

They germinate at once when their seeds are mois-
tened by the next rain. In short, all plants must adapt
themselves to survive in such an inhospitable region
as the desert.
Life in the Deserts
Despite its inhospitality, the desert has always been
peopled by different groups of inhabitants. They
struggle against an environment deficient in water,
food and other means of livelihood. Some, like the
Egyptians have attained a high level of civilization,
others like the Bedouin Arabs have fared quite well
with their flocks of sheep, goats, camels and horses.
The Bushmen of the Kalahari remain so primitive in
their mode of living that they barely survive. They
are, in fact, a relic of the Old Stone Age in the mod-
ern world. The desert inhabitants may be grouped
under the following categories:
l. The primitive hunters and collectors. Of the pri-
mitive tribes, the Bushmen and the Bindibu are the
best known. Both the tribes are nomadic hunters and
food gatherers, growing no crops and domesticating
no animals. The Bushmen roam the Kalahari Desert
with their bows and poisoned arrows, spears, traps
and snares. They are not only skilful and strong but
have grpat endurance. In order to capture their prey,
they have to be very patient and if necessary run
many kilometres to track down the wounded ani-
mals. In this way, they hunt antelope, and other
smaller animals. The women and children collect
insects, rodents and lizards, and gather honey, roots,
grass and grubs. Great skill is required in obtaining
water in the desert. Dew is carefully gathered from
leaves early in the morning and stored in ostrich
shells. Very often, it is necessary to dig a hole in
damp sand and suck the water up from the ground
through a hollow reed. This is often a very slow
process. Bushmen either wear a loin cloth or go vir-
tually naked. They travel in small family groups, and
live together in open sherms. This is a hollow dug
beneath a thorn tree, surrounded by bushes. At
night a fire is lit to keep the family warm.
The Bindibu or Aborigines of Australia live in very
much the same way as the Bushmen. They are skil-
led trackers and some of them use wooden throwing
sticks or boomerangs and spears. They also domesti-
cate the dingo, a wild dog that assists them in track-
irtg down kangaroos, rabbits and birds. The women
gather grass, roots, seeds, berries, moles and insects,
to supplement their diet. Like the wandering Bush-
men, the Bindibu move in family groups in search of
fresh hunting grounds. But one distinct difference is
that they always stay close to a water supply as they
have not devised a means of tapping and storing wa-
ter. They live in wurlies, simple shelters made of
branches and tufts and grass.
2. The nomadic herdsmen. These people represent
a more advanced group of desert dwellers who pur-
sue a livestock. economy. They ride on animals
instead of walking and are heavily clad against the
blazing sun, the stormy winds and the chilly nights.
The Bedouin of Arabia ride on horses and live in
tents; the Tuaregs of the Sahara are camel riders and
dwell in grass zeriba, while the Gobi Mongols ride
on horses to herd their yaks and live in portable
yurts (a kind of tent). The Bedouin are the best
examples of a desert group who have fared well as
nomadic herdsmen. Besides keeping large flocks of
animals, they are also engaged in trade with the car-
avan merchants and the oases people. All round the
year, the Bedouin wander with their herds in search
of water and green pastures. Their wealth is their
animals: sheep, goats, camels and perhaps a few
horses. The animals provide them with all that they
require, daily milk and cheese and on occasions
meat as well. Their skin is used for hides or leather,
for making tents, clothing, belts, footwear and water
bags. From the hair and wool, the Bedouin make
clothes, mats, ropes, rugs and barpets. These can
also be exchanged at trading stations or oases for
other necessities of life which the desert herdsmen
cannot produce like dates, grain, beverages, medi-
cines, firearms and other manufactured articles.
The Bedouin move in groups of about a hundred.
18.B Nomadic herdsmen lead their sheep across the
desert in Syria to pastures Servizio Editoriale Fotografico

They follow a regular pattern of routes, along which
are scanty patches of pastures, wells or springs, In
this manner, one group rarely clashes with the other
in their search for-new grounds to pitch their tents.
Since they move so often, they always travel light
and only essentials are carried along (Plate 18.B).
3. The caravan traders. These were the travelling
merchqnts of the desert. Their journeys across the
wastes of the Sahara or Russian Turkestan some-
times lasted months or even years. They travelled at
night as a team and were well-armed. They carried
a wide range of goods into remote interiors where
their merchandise was highly sought after. These
goods were sold or exchanged for hides, rugs, car-
pets and other valuable products of the deserts.
Though profits were high, the risks were equally
great.
The pack-animal used by the caravans to carry
their goods across the deserts was the camel, aptly
described as the 'ship of the desert'. Unlike horses
which have sharp hooves that sink readily in the
sandy desert, the camel has broad padded feet that
will not slip in the sand. A pack-camel, adequately
fed, can carry a load of 160 kg (350 pounds) and
travel 80 km (50 miles) a day. And a racing camel
can do twice the distance when ridden! The camel
has several other advantages, it provides milk and
hair. It can store up water in its stomach, and fat in
its hump, so that it can go for long periods without
either food or water.
With the introduction of modern air, road and rail
transport, the role of the caravan traders is greatly
reduced. Goods can be conveyed much more
cheaply and with greater security by desert jeeps,
vans or trucks. But between the interior oases and
scattered out-posts beyond the reach of roads, the
caravan routes remain the only form of available
transport.
4. The settled cultivators. For crops to be cultivated
in the desert, irrigation is indispensable. This is
obtained either from oases, rivers or dams, through
a network of canals. In Egypt, the Nile supports a
population of 40 million, mainly concentrated in the
Nile valley and delta. Thp life-giving waters of the
Nile made it possible for the Egyptians to raise many
crops as early as 5 000 years ago. When the Nile
flooded in summer, the overflowed water was caught
in basins with raised banks and led into the fields to
irrigate the crops. This was basin irrigation, which
was widely practised by the ancient Egyptian farm-
ers and is still employed by the Egyptians today.
Rice and cotton are cultivated in summer, followed
by wheat, barley, beans and other minor crops in
winter. Modern concrete dams constructed across
the Nile, e.g. Aswan and Sennar Dams are even
more effective for extensive irrigation works. The
flood-water can be held back and controlled and
then released at any part of the year to feed the
fields that yield two, three or even more crops a
year. In the same way, desert cultivators rely on the
Indus in Pakistan, the Tigris-Euphrates in Iraq, and
the Colorado in the Imperial Valley of California,
and are able to irrigate millions of hectares of arid
land for crop production.
In the deserts, wherever there are oases some form
of settled life is bound to follow. These are depres-
sions of varying sizes, where underground water
reaches the surface. Some of them are abnormally
large like the Tafilalet Oasis in Morocco which mea-
sures 13 000 sq. km (5,000 square miles), supporting
many settlements, including large towns. Others
may be so small that they are no bigger than the
mining pools that we are so familiar with, e.g. the
Ghadames Oasis of Libya is only 2,6 sq. km (one
square mile) in size. Life in an oasis is secure and
well-organized. A wall is usually constructed around
the oasis to keep out the violent duststorms called
simooms. The oasis people live in mUd-brick houses
with flat roofs, closely packed together. The streets
are narrow and winding, and the heart of the settle-
ment is dominated by the suq (central market place),
the mosque, school and shopping blocks. Sn4s may
18.C The oasis of El Golea. The dunes are gradually
encroaching on the date palms, Camera Press

also be set up kilometres from anywhere and people
come from a number of surrounding settlements on
special days to trade (Plate 18.C).
Around the settlement are the agricultural lands.
Water is led to the fields by irrigation channels or
drawn up from wells by camels or mules. The most
important tree is the date palm which is grown in
dug-out hollows so that its roots can penetrate deep
into the ground in search of water. Iraq is the world's
greatest producer of dates. The fruit is consumed
locally and also exported. Other crops cultivated
include maize, barley, wheat, cotton, sugar-cane,
fruits and vegetables. With the development of
motor routes across the deserts, many sophisticated
foreign goods can now reach the oases.
5. The mining settlers. The lure of mineral wealth
has attracted many immigrants into the desert. Min-
ing camps and isolated settlements have sprung up
following the discovery of certain mineral deposits.
It was gold that brought immigrants scrambling into
the Great Australian Desert. Water and food sup-
plies have to be brought 480 km (300 miles) from
Perth to keep the mines going. Some of them like
Kalgoorlie and Boulder have become towns of con-
siderable size. In the Kalahari Desert, the discovery
of diamonds and copper has brought many white
men to the 'thirst land' as it is called. Even in the
most arid Atacama, in northern Chile, large mining
camps have been established for the mining of cal-
iche (cemented gravels) from which sodium nitrate.
a valuable fertilizer, is extracted and exported to all
parts of the world. The mines are worked by local
Indian labourers and supervised by foreign techni-
cians. Besides nitrates, copper is also mined. These
two products have directly or indirectly contributed
to the growing size of the Chilean towns of Arica,
Iquique, Antofagasta and Chuquicamata. The last
named is the world's largest copper town. Similarly
in the deserts of North America, silver is mined in
Mexico, uranium in Utah and copper in Nevada. A
host of other minerals and their by-products have,
in fact, greatly altered the landscape and the econ-
omy of such arid regions.
In recent years, the discovery of oil, in many parts
of the Saharan and Arabian Deserts has transformed
this forgotten part of the globe. In Algeria, oil wells
have been sunk 3 km (2 miles) deep to tap oil. In the
Middle East, pipelines over 1 600 km (1,000 miles)
long have been laid to bring oil from the shores
of the Persian Gulf across Saudi Arabia to Saida
(Lebanon) and Banias (Syria) on the Mediterranean
coast. With half of the world's reserves of oil still
untapped in this region, the deserts here will vir-
tually be paved with gold! In Iraq, Kuwait and Saudi
Arabia the desert landscape is fast changing. New
roads, huge palaces, ultra-modern hospitals, air-con-
ditioned apartments and swimming pools, are exam-
ples of a thriving new era created entirely by
oil-'liquid gold'.
Ouestions and Exercises
1. Explain how the aridity of the desert is related
to
(a) off-shore Trade Winds;
(b) the Sub-tropical High Pressure Belts (the
Horse Latitudes);
(c) cold ocean currents.
2. State any distinct differences between the hot
deserts and mid-latitude deserts in: 
5.
(a) climate;
(b) vegetation;
(c) way of life.
3. With reference to actual examples, describe
the activities and modes of living of the differ-
ent groups of people that inhabit the deserts.
Attempt to account for their differences.
4. Explain any three of the following:
(a) The hot deserts of the world are located on
the western coasts of continents.
(b) Patagonia is a desert in the rain-shadow of
the Andes.
(c) Desert plants must adapt themselves to
survive.
(d) Camels are the 'ships of the desert'.
Write brief notes on any three of these topics:
(a) The Bindibu of the Great Australian
Desert.
(b) Date palm cultivation in an oasis.
(c) The role of oil in the development of the
desert economy.
(d) The Bedouin-the wandering herdsmen.
(e) Agricultural development of any selected
desert region.

8.
6.
(a) Name the major hot deserts in the north-
ern hemisphere.
(b) What do they have in common?
(c) For any one ofthe deserts you have named
in (a) explain why it is so sparsely popu-
lated.
The following are selected statistics of. three
different types of climate:
Define the following terms:
(a) epiphytes;
(b) halophytes;
(c) saprophytes;
(d) hydrophytes.
Select any two of the above and state the type
of climatic or natural region that they thrive in
best.
(a) In what ways is the Atacama Desert dif-
ferent from the Patagonia on the other side
of the Andes?
(b) What economic activities are important
there?
(a) Why are plants in the deserts considered
'xerophytic'?
(b) State five different ways in which these
xerophytic plants adapt to survive the arid
environment.
(c) In what other climatic regions are xero-
phytic plants also found?
A The diurnal range of temperature
is very great
B Rainfall is irregular and most un-
reliable
C The relative humidity is very low
D The sky is overcast most of the
time
5. Halophytes are plants that
A thrive best in swamPy coasts
B Survive best in saline soils
C Can be grown only in the shade
D Can trap insects and pests
7.
9.
Sra-
,ton
Loca,ion 
Mean Annual 
Annual 
Annual
Temperature Temperature Rainfall
Range
Se6on of
Maximum
Rainfall
B of the high incidence of sunstroke
C camels are expensive to maintain
D many caravan traders have taken
to oil prospecting
An example of a plant that is cap-
able of withstanding long periods of
drought is the
A elm
B acacia
Cfir
D oak
Which of the following characteris-
tics of the hot desert climate is /east
acceptable?
10.
B
C
l9'N 73'E 
8l"F 
l0"F 
73 ins 
Summer
(27"c\ 
(5.5'C.) 
(1825 mm)
l3'N 45'E 
83"F 
l3'F 
2 ins 
lrregutar
(28"C) 
(7"C) 
(50 mm)
32"S 1 l6'E 
64"F 
lg'F 
34 ins 
Winrer
(lrc) 
(lcPC) 
(850 mm)
(a) Attempt to name each of the stations A,
B and C.
(b) State the climate experienced in each of
the stations.
(c) Give an explanatory account of the differ-
ences in temperature and rainfall between
the three stations.
Sample Objective Ouestions
1. All the following statements about
hot deserts of the world are true er-
cept
A They are located on the western
portions of continents
B They lie along the Horse Lati-
tudes
C Cold currents bathe their shores
D Trade winds are on-shore
2. The caravan traders of the Sahara
Desert are declining in number be-
cause
A caravan routes are being replaced
bv motorwavs
4.

