Chapter 24 The Cool Temperate Eastern
Margin (Laurentian) Climate
Distribution
The Cool Temperate Eastern Margin (Laurentian)
Climate is an intermediate type of climate between
the British and the Siberian type of climate. It has
features of both the maritime and the continental
climates. It is apparent from Fig. 24.1, that the Lau-
rentian type of climate is found only in two regions.
One is north-eastern North America, including east-
ern Canada, north-east U.S.A. (i.e. Maritime
Provinces and the New England states), and
Newfoundland. This may be referred to as the North
American region. The other region is the eastern
coastlands of Asia, including eastern Siberia, North
China, Manchuria, Korea and northern Japan. It
may be referred to as the Asiatic region.
In the southern hemisphere, this climatic type is
absent because only a small section of the southern
Fi1.24.1 Regions with a Cool Temperate Eastern Margin
Climate (Laurentian-type)
continents extends south of the latitude of 40" S. The
only possible location is in eastern Patagonia, south
of Bahia Blanca (lat. 39'S) to Tierra del Fuego
(lat. 54" S). But the climatic barrier of the southern
Andes is so complete, that the Westerlies hardly
ever reach Patagonia. The region is subjected to
aridity rather than continentality. Its annual precip-
itation is not more than 254 mm (10 inches), so that
it is a rain-shadow desert. Elsewhere in the southern
hemisphere, the climate is so equable and the
oceanic influence is so profound that neither the con-
tinental nor the eastern margin type of climate
exists.
Climate
The Laurentian type of climate has cold, dry winters
and warm, wet summers. Winter temperatures may
t
vls
i--- -\- +- --
t*t\r-/ 
s-
JLaurentian type ol Climate
-
o
Scale 1:215000000

27180
21170
16/60
10/50
4t40
-1l30
-7120
.;
5 ..'
!Eo
6^-
Eo
-q,
-9
t.:
gE
27t80
21170
16/60
10/50
4t40
-1l30
-7t20
-9
=LCF
i:E
127t5
102t4
76t3
o/o
2Vt10
229t9
20318
17817
15216
127t5
10214
0/0
.9
o
i'r
!Eo
FD
o
JFMAMJJASOND
months
New York 
J
Temp.:C: 
-l
F.: 
3t
Precip. (mml: 
ilnches): J J
D 
range/total
1 24"C
34 43'F.
84 1041 mm
3 3 41 inches
Fis.24.2(al
Laurentian-type of Climate in North America
Place: New York, U.S.A. (41"N, 74'W)
Altitude: 96 metres (314 feet)
Annual precipitation: 1 041 mm (41 inches)
Annuaf temperature range: 24oC (23" - (-l')Cll43"F (74i-
31"F)
be well below freezing-point and snow falls to quite
a depth. Summers are as warm as the tropics
(21"-27 "C/70"-80'F) and if it were not for the cool-
ing effects of the off-shore cold currents from the
Arctic, the summer might be even hotter. Though
rain falls throughout the year, there is a distinct sum-
mer maximum from the easterly winds from the
oceans. Of the annual precipitation of. 762 to
I524 mm (30 to 60 inches), two-thirds come in the
summer. Winter is dry and cold, because the winds
are dry Westerlies that blow out from the continen-
tal interiors. We shall now examine in greater detail
the variations of the Laurentian type of climate
between the North American region and the Asiatic
region.
The North American region. The most remarkable
characteristic of the Laurentian climate of the North
American region is its uniformity in precipitation
(about 75 to 100 mm/3 to 4 inches monthly) with a
late summer maximum. New York in Fig.24.2(a)
has an annual precipitation of 1 041 mm (41 inches)
with the wettest months in July and August
(1.07 mml4.2 inches eaCtr). No month is really dry,
and the driest month, November, has 64 mm (2.5
inches) of rain. This uniformity of precipitation is
JFMAMJJASOND
months
Peking:JFMAM
Temp."C: 
-4 -2 5 
'14 20
oF., 
24 29 41 57 68
Precip.(mm): 3 
5 15 36
(inchesl:01 0'2 02 0-6 14
Fig.24.2(bl
montns
30"c
5C r.
635 mm
25 inches
Laurentian-type of climate in Asia
Place: Beijing (Peking), North China (40'N. 116'E)
Altitude: 40 metres (131 feet)
Annual precipitation: 635 mm (25 inches)
Annual temperature range: 30"C (26" - (-4fCy55"F. (79" -
2CF.l
largely due to the Atlantic influence and that of the
Great Lakes. The warm Gulf Stream increases the
moisture content of easterly winds from the open
Atlantic. The prevailing Westerlies which penetrate
across the Rockies carry depressions over the Great
Lakes to the New England states. These winds thus
promote wet conditions especially in winter, which
are vital for the agricultural activities of north-east-
ern North America. The meeting of the warm Gulf
Stream and the cold Labrador Current in coastal
waters off Newfoundland produces dense mist and
fog and gives rise to much precipitation. St. John's,
its capital, has as much as l372mm (54 inches) of
annual precipitation. It is said that Newfoundland
experierices more drizzles than any other part of the
world.
In summer, the Westerlies bring fewer depressions
and extend their continental influence to the coast.
Temperatures are normally high in summer for the
latitude. New York has a mean July temperature of
23 "C (74 'F) and sometimes even as high as 32'C
(90'F). Once, on 7 August 1918, the absolute max-
imum of 34 "C (104 'F) was reached. Such high tem-
peratures in a cool temperate maritime region,
where the relative humidity is high, can be very
F M A I\4 J J 
A 'S O N
-1491621232219137
31 39 49 60 69 74 72 67 56 44
86 9t 86 79 91 107 107 94 89 64
3.4 3.6 3.4 3 I 3.6 4 2 4.2 3.7 3.5 25
JJASOND
24262520t343
76 79 17 68 55 39 37
76 ._239 160 66 15 I 
3.0 9.4 63 2.6 06 0.3 0.1

trying. Prolonged heat waves cause discomfort and
frustration in crowded cities. In winter, the temper-
ature drops and snow falls. New York has two
months below freezing-point, and an annual tem-
perature range of 24'C (43 'F). Away from the mar-
itime influence, the cold increases. The mean
January temperatires for Quebec, rJttawa and Mon-
treal are -12"C, -1l"C and -10"C (10"F., 12'F. and
14"F.) respectively. The temperature ranges widen
accordingly.
The Asiatic region. In contrast, the rainfall distri-
bution of the Asiatic region is far less uniform. Win-
ters are cold and very dry while summers are very
warm and exceptionally wet. Beijing (Peking), a typ-
ical station of the Laurentian Climate in northern
China will bring out these facts very clearly
Fig.2a.2b). It has seven dry months from October
to April with a total rainfall of less than 50 mm (2.1
inches) which is only one-twelfth of the annual total
of 635 mm (25 inches). The remaining five months
receive more than 25 mm (1 inch) a month, with
239 mm (9.4 inches) in July alone. The rainfall
rdgime, is, in fact, similar to that of the tropical mon-
soon type in India, where the whole year's rainfall
is concentrated in the three summer months. The
mountainous interior of China has such pronounced
continental effects that the intense heating in sum-
mer creates a region of extreme low pressure, and
moisture-laden winds from the Pacific Ocean and the
Sea of Japan blow in as the South-East Monsoon.
The Laurentian type of climate here is often des-
cribed as the Cool Temperate Monsoon Climate.
It has a very long, cold winter and a big annual range
of temperature. The July mean for Beijing (Peking)
is 26 "C (79 "F) while that of January is only -4 "C
(24"F). The temperature range is therefore more
than 30 "C (55'F). The dry, cold wind that blows out
from the heart of Asia in winter carries fine, yellow-
ish dust and deposits it as a thick mantle of loess in
Shanxi (Shansi), Shaanxi (Shensi), and other neigh-
bouring provinces at the bend of the Huang He
(Hwang Ho). Much of the winter precipitation in
northern China, Korea and Hokkaido (Japan) is in
the form of snow. In the mountainous cllstncts, the
snow piles to a depth of 1.5 to 3 metres (5 to 10
feet).
The climate of Japan is modified by its insularity,
and also by the meeting of warm and cold ocean cur-
rents. It receives adequate rainfall from both the
South-East Monsoon in summer and the North-West
Monsoon in winter. The latter is the dry, cold wind
from mainland Asia, but after crossing the Sea of
Japan it has gathered sufficient moisture to give
heavy relief rain or snow on the western coasts of
Japan. The rainfall is more evenly distributed, as in
Tokyo, with two maxima, one in June, the Plum
Rain (165 mm/6.5 inches), and the other in Sep-
tember, the Typhoon Rain (229 mm/9 inches). On
the windward slopes of the Japanese Alps on the
west, some stations, e.g. Kanazawa, have more than
2 590 mm (102 inches) of rain, much of it falling as
snow. The maritime influence also effectively mod-
erates the temperature range. Tokyo has a range of
22'C (40 "F) (26'C179 "F in August and 4 'Cl39 'F
in January) with none of the months below freezing-
point. The warm Kuroshio has played an important
part in making the climate of Japan less extreme. In
meeting the cold Oyashio from the north, it also pro-
duces fog and mist, making north Japan a 'second
Newfoundland'. Fishing replaces agriculture as the
main occupation in many of the indented coastlands.
Natural Vegetation
The predominant vegetation of the Laurentian type
of climate is cool temperate forest. The moderately
heavy precipitation (889 to | 143 mn,/35 to 45
inches) throughout the year, warm summers and the
damp air from fogs, all favour the growth of trees.
Forests are of a mixed nature: evergreen conifers
predominate north of 50" N latitude and deciduous
forests south of 50' N latitude. The increase in the
length and severity of the winter excludes forests
that are not adaptable to cold conditions. In the
Asiatic region (eastern Siberia and Korea), the con-
iferous forests are, in fact, a continuation of the great
coniferous belt of the taiga. Winters are less severe
than in the taiga due to the maritime position and
the conifers are less exposed to the rigours of the
weather. Lumbering has always been a major occu-
pation of this sparsely populated part of eastern Asia
and timber is a leading export item. Much of the
original coniferous forests of fir, spruce and larch
have been cleared as a result of lumbering rather
than agriculture. Eastern Canada, along the banks
of the St. Lawrence River is the heart of the Cana-
dian timber and wood pulp industry.
South of latitude 50o N, the coniferous forests give
way to deciduous forests. Oak, beech, maple and
birch are the principal trees. Like their counterparts
on the western margins, the deciduous forests are
fairly open. A long growing season of over six
months and an adequate supply of moisture from
maritime sources encourage rapid growth of ferns

and other temperate undergrowth. The occurrence
of trees in almost pure stands and the predominance
of only a handful of species, greatly enhance the
commercial value of these forests. As a result, they
have been extensively felled for the extraction of
temperate hardwood. In many parts of Manchuria,
Korea and Japan, the forests have made way for the
plough. Both food and cash crops are raised. In Can-
ada, due to the greater reserves of coniferous soft-
woods and their overriding importance in industrial
uses, the annual production of deciduous hardwood
is much less significant.
Economic Development
Lumbering and its associated timber, paper and pulp
industries are the most important economic under-
takings. (Details of lumbering have already been
dealt with in Chapter 23.)
Agriculture is less important in view of the sever-
Fig.24.3 Fishing: the North American region
ity of the winter and its long duration. Fortunately
the maritime influence and the heavy rainfall enable
some hardy crops to be raised for local needs. Pota-
toes thrive over large areas of the podzolized soils,
while hardy cereals like oats and barley can be sown
and successfully harvested before the onset of the
cold winter. A number of other interesting crops are
produced in the Asiatic region such as soya beans
(northern China, Manchuria and Korea are amongst
the world's leading producers), groundnuts, ses-
ame, rapeseeds, tung oil and mulberry. In the North
American region, arable farming is not carried out
on a sizeable scale, except in the more favoured
localities. Farmers are engaged in dairy farming, hay
cultivation and, in mild maritime areas, fruit grow-
ing. The fertile Annapolis valley in Nova Scotia is
the world's most renowned region for apples. Fish-
ing is, however, the most outstanding economic
activity of the Laurentian climatic regions.
' 
)2',o'1"".."t; 
o 
mites
,ru 
fiffi 
continental Shelves
ATLANTIC
MARITIME
PROVINCES
BRUNSWICK

Fishing
FISHING OFF NEWFOUNDLAND, THE MARITIME PROVINCES
AND NEW ENGLAND
This is one of the world's largest fishing grounds par-
ticularly on the Grand Banks of Newfoundland
Gig. zaQ. The reasons for its importance are geo-
graphical. Fish feed on minute marine organisms,
collectively called plankton, which is present in
abundance only in shallow waters adjacent to land
masses where sunlight can penetrate. The gently
sloping continental shelves (less than 180 metres/600
feet deep) which stretch for over 320 km (200 miles)
south-east of Newfoundland, and off the coasts of
the Maritime Provinces and New England contain
a rich collection of microscopic plankton. Fish of all
types and sizes feed and breed here and support a
thriving fishing industry not only in Canada and the
U.S.A., but also in countries like Norway, France,
Britain, Portugal, Denmark, Russia and Japan,
which send fishing fleets to the Grand Banks.
As less than 1 per cent of Newfoundland is culti-
vated, fishing provides employment for almost the
entire population. It is not only the chief source of
wealth to Newfoundland, but also a major export
item to all the Maritime Provinces. Both pelagic fish
which live near the surface and demersal fish which
live near the bottom of shallow seas are causht. The
24.A A fishing settlement in Newfoundland. Much of the
fish is dried for export. National Film Board of Canada
gnr*r
chief fish caught is cod which is consumed fresh or
dried, salted, smoked, canned or packed in ice for
export to mainland America, Central and South
America and southern Europe. Cod liver oil is
exported too. Other fishes caught are haddock, hal-
ibut, hake, herring, plaice, and mackerel. Various
kinds of fishing craft and techniques are employed
to obtain maximum harvests from the sea. Modern
trawlers, dragging large conical-shaped nets and
drifters, carrying curtainlike rectangular nets, oper-
ate extensively off the Atlantic coasts. They are
equipped with radio and radar devices to navigate
through the dense fog, avoid collision with icebergs
and also maintain contact with their headquarters on
land. Off-shore fishermen also use traps, lines and
nets to catch crabs, lobsters and shrimps for home
consumption and increasingly for export. Further
inland, in lakes and rivers, such as the St. Lawrence
and the Great Lakes, freshwater fish, e.g. salmon,
trout, eels and sturgeons are caught . Fig. 24.4 shows
some common species of fish found in temperate
waters.
In Newfoundland and along the Atlantic coasts
are many fishing ports. St. John's, chief port of New-
foundland with a population of nearly 125 000, is the
headquarters of the Grand Banks fishing industries.
It also had interests in sealing and whaling but these
have declined. [n the fishing ports of Halifax and
-.", 
..'

*17;ir'
Fi1.24.4 Some common
waters
species of fish in temperate

Yarmouth in Nova Scotia and in the New England
ports are processing plants that cut, clean, salt, pack
or preserve fish for disposal by refrigerated boats,
trains or trucks to all parts of the continent. They
are bases for large fleets of trawlers. A modern traw-
ler may well cost anything around a million dollars.
The men stay on board in floating factories far out
at sea for days and even weeks. Fishing in this
part of the world is highly specialized and very effi-
cient. In fact over-fishing is a growing problem. The
United States government and international fishing
bodies are now contemplating strict measures in fish
conservation if this major source of protein food is
to be sustained for regular supply in the years to
come.
FISHING OFF JAPAN
In the north-west Pacific, surrounding the islands of
Japan, is another major fishing area of the world.
Nowhere else in the world are there so many people
engaged in fishing as in this part of the north-west
Pacific. The mountainous nature of Japan and parts
of mainland eastern Asia have driven many to seek
a livelihood from the sea. The scarcity of meat (there
is little pasture in Japan for livestock farming of any
kind) and religiow reasons have popularized fish as
the principal item of diet and the chief protein food
of the Japanese and the Chinese as well. Large quan-
tities of fish and fish products are either canned or
preserved for export to neighbouring countries. The
Japanese also make use of fish wastes, fish meal and
seaweeds as fertilizers in their farms. Japan is one
of the few countries that has taken to seaweed cul-
tivation. Coastal farms that are submerged in water
grow weeds for sale as fertilizers, chemical ingredi-
ents and even as food.
Another interesting aspect of Japanese fishing is
pearl culture. The divers of Southern Japan dive
down into the coastal waters and bring to the sur-
face shell-fish called pearl oysters and extract the
highly prized pearls for sale as ornaments. The lin-
ing of the oyster shells, called mother-of-pearl, is
used for the manufacture of pearl buttons, and
other decorative articles. As natural pearls in oy-
sters are difficult to obtain in large numbers, the
Japanese have begun to breed the young oysters.
By injecting tiny 'seeds' into them, the oysters are
made to secrete the pearl material, which accumu-
lates to form 'cultured pearls'. These are collected
and exported (Plate 24.8).
The Japanese interest in fishing is not confined to
their own territorial waters. They venture far and
24.8 A cultured pearl farm in Japan
wide into the Arctic, Antarctic and the Atlantic
waters. Large whaling fleets complete with process-
ing plants and experienced crews stay out in the
open seas and return only occasionally for refuelling
or replenishment of fresh provisions. As a nation,
Japan accounts for a sixth of the world's total annual
catch. She is the world's greatest fishing nation
today. Her active participation in international fish-
ing enterprises and her advanced fishing techniques
speak well of her relentless drive to make good from
the seas what she lacks on land.
Let us find out why this is possible.
l. Japan is not well endowed with natural re-
sources, for as much as 80 per cent of her land is
'non-agricultural'. She has to take to the sea if she
wants to survive. This has compelled the people to
develop the seas, and fishing has for centuries been
the traditional occupation of many Japanese living
along the coast.
2. The continental shelves around the islands of
Japan are rich in plankton, due to the meeting of the
warm Kuroshio and the cold Oyashio currents and
provide excellent breeding grounds for all kinds of
fish including herring, cod, mackerel, bonito,
salmon, sardine and tuna, as well as crabs and lobs-
ters.
3. The indented coastline of Japan provides shel-
tered fishing ports, calm waters and safe landing
places, ideal for the fishing industry. In Hokkaido,
where the Laurentian type of climate is too cold for
much agriculture, fishing takes first place. Hakodate
and Kushiro are large fishing ports, complete with
refrigeration facilities.
4. Lack of lowlands and pastures means that only
a few animals can be kept to supply meat and other
protein food. Fish in all its varied forms, fresh,
canned, dried, frozen, and in the form of fish pastes,
fish sauce and spiced condiments takes the place of

meat as Japan's primary source of protein food.
There is a great demand for it locally, and for export
to other east Asiatic neighbours which lack the tech-
niques of large-scale commercial fishing.
5. The Japanese fishermen began with small fishing
boats, using nets, traps and lines. With the progress
made in industries, fishing has also become more
scientific, aiming at heavy hauls, high returns and
economy of. time, effort and money. Though three-
quarters of the fishermen practise off-shore pelagic
fishing either full-time or part-time, in small boats,
most of the commercial deep-sea demersal fishing is
now highly mechanized. Powered trawlers and mod-
ern refrigeration plants backed by sound financial
organizations have greatly increased the annual fish
yield. Japan is now not only a major producer and
exporter of fish and marine products, but also a
centre for marine and fishing research.
O,uestions and Exercises
1. (a) Locate on a world map the extent of the
Cool Temperate Eastern Margin (Lauren-
tian) Climate.
(b) Explain why this type of climate is con-
fined to the northern hemisphere.
(c) Describe its climate.
2. Compare and contrast the climate of any two
of the following pairs of areas:
(a) Laurentian Climate in the North American
region and the Asiatic region.
(b) Tropical Monsoon Climate of India and
the Warm Temperate Eastern Margin
(China type) Climate in South China.
(c) The Steppe type of climate in Eurasia and
the Siberian type of climate in northern
Canada.
(d) The Tundra Climate of Greenland and
Trade Wind Desert Climate of central
Australia.
3. (a) Name the major fishing areas of the world.
(b) What types of fishing can normally be dis-
tinguished in such major fishing grounds?
(c) Name a few methods used to catch the fish.
(d) For any one major fishing area you have
selected, explain the geographical factors
which have contributed to its importance.
4. Write brief notes on any three of the following:
(a) The economy of thl forests of the Lauren-
tian regions.
Fishing in Japan.
Soya bean cultivation in Manchuria.
Fruit growing in the Maritime Provinces of
Canada.
The following statistics are a guide to four dif-
ferent types of climate in the northern hemi-
sphere.
(a) Name the type of climate that each of them
represents.
(b) Locate a probable station for each.
(c) For any two of them describe their climatic
characteristics.
(b)
(c)
(d)
5.
Stations
July
temp.
January
temp.
Annual
temp. range
Annual
Rainfall
Month of max.
rainfall
A
27 "C (81 "F)
26 "C (79'F)
1.7'C (3'F)
2 438 mm
(96")
April and
October
B
13 "C (55 'F)
-11 'C (12 "F)
23.9'C (43 'F)
203 mm
(8")
June, July,
August
C
33'C (91 "F)
13 "C (55 'F)
r9.4"C (35 "F)
76 mm
(3")
irregular
D
23'C (74 "F)
-1 'C (30 "F)
24.4 "C (44 .F)
1041 mm
(41")
July, August,
September

6.
(a) The cool temperate eastern margin (Lau-
rentian) climate is confined to the eastern
seaboard regions of only two continents.
Name these two continents.
(b) Outline the special features of this type of
climate.
(c) Name the cold currents that bathe their
eastern shores.
(a) What type of natural vegetation is found
in the Laurentian region?
(b) Name a few of the more important vege-
tational species.
(c) What economic uses have men made of the
local vegetation?
Both Newfoundland and Japan are major fish-
ing grounds of the world. Make a comparative
study of these two fishing regions under these
headings:
Sample Objective Ouestions
The Laurentian type of climate is
usually associated with
A a small annual temperature range
B westerlies in summer
C frequent blizzards
D much fog and mist off the coast
Fishing is important in Newfound-
land for these reasons excepl
A It has a wide continental shelf
B The irregular coastline provides
shelter for fishing ports
C The dense fog provides food for
the fishes
D The cool climate helps to pre-
serve the fish
3. In recent years there has been much
decline in the world's fishing hauls.
Effective conservation methods have
to be employed to check the decline.
Which of the following conservation
methods is not likely to be prac-
tised?
A a ban on indiscriminate fishing
B artificial fertilization of eggs
C protection from any kind of water
pollution
D the giving up of fishing.
4. The cool temperate eastern margin
(a) species of fish caught;
(b) major fishing ports;
(c) factors that have contributed to their
development as world major fishing
grounds.
(a) What are ocean currents?
(b) With reference to regions with an eastern
margin Laurentian type of climate, show
how ocean currents influence the climate
and the livelihood of the people.
(c) Name two other parts of the world where
ocean currents have a pronounced influ-
ence on the adjoining land mass.
Write an explanatory account of the main fea-
tures of either continental climates or mari-
time climates.
(Laurentian) climate is best repre-
sented by
A Newfoundland and the Maritime
Provinces
B the Scandinavian Peninsula
C southern Africa
D Australasia
5. The predominant vegetation of the
Laurentian region of Canada is
A sub-tropical forest
B cool temperate forest
C Mediterranean forest
D monsoon forest
9.
a
8.
10.

