Chapter 23 The Cool Temperate Continental
(Siberian) Climate
Distribution
The Cool Temperate Continental (Siberian) Climate
is experienced only in the northern hemisphere
where the continents within the high latitudes have
a broad east-west spread (Fig. 23.1). On its poleward
side, it merges into the Arctic tundra of Canada and
Eurasia at around the Arctic Circle. Southwards, the
climate becomes less severe and fades into the tem-
perate Steppe climate dealt with in Chapter 20.
The predominant vegetation of this Siberian or
'sub-Arctic' type of ilimate is evergreen coniferous
forest. It stretches in a great, continuous belt across
North America, Europe and Asia. The greatest sin-
gle band of the coniferous forest is the taiga (a Rus-
sian word for coniferous forest) in Siberia. In
Europe the countries that have a similar type of cli-
mate and forest are mainly in northern Europe, Swe-
den and Finland. There are short stretches of
Fig. 23,1 The cool temperate coniferous forests
natural coniferous forest, due to high altitude, in
Germany, Poland, Switzerland, Austria and other
parts of Europe. In North America, this sub-Arctic
belt stretches from Alaska across Canada into
Labrador, and is found on the high Rocky Moun-
tains farther south.
The Siberian Climate is conspicuously absent in
the southern hemisphere because of the narrowness
of the southern continents in the high latitudes. The
strong oceanic influence reduces the severity of the
winter and coniferous forests are found only on the
mountainous uplands of southern Chile, New Zea-
land, Tasmania and south-east Australia.
Glimate
Temperature. The climate of the Siberian type is
characterized by a bitterly cold winter of long dura-
tion, and a cool brief summer. Spring and autumn

21t70
16/60
10/50
4t40
-1l30
-7 t20
-12110
-18/0
76t3
25t1
0/o
JFMAMJJASOND
months
Moscow:JFMAMJJA
Temp. oc: 
-l't -9 4 3 '12 t 7 t9 t7
-F.: 
12 15 24 38 53 62 66 63
Precip. (mm): 28 23 30 38 4 51 jl 
(ihchesl: 1.1 0.9 t.2 1.5 1.9 Z.O 2.a ?.9
D range/total
--8 30"C
17 54'F.
41 533 mm
l 6 21 inches
FiS.23.2lal Siberian Climate in Eurasia
Place: Moscow, U.S.S.R. (56" N,37'E)
Altitude: 146 metres 480 feet)
Annual precipitation: 533 mm (21 inches)
Annual temperature range: 30'C (19"*(-1l "CyS4"F (66o-
12"F|
are merely brief transitional periods. The isotherm
of 10 "C (50 "F) for the warmest month forms the
poleward boundary of the Siberian climate and the
winter months are always below freezing point. The
stations chosen to illustrate this type of climate are
Moscow, in continental Europe and Churchill, in
northern Canada, bordering the Hudson Bay. The
coldest month in Moscow is January with -1L'C
(12'F). The warmest month (July) is as high as 1.9'C
(66 "F); thus there is an annual range of 30'C
(54 'F), which is common in the Siberian type of cli-
mate. In comparison, the annual temperature range
for Churchill is even higher, reaching 40 "C (73'F)
(-28 "Cl-19 oF in January and 12 'C/54 "F in July).
This is due to the more northerly position of Church-
ill. The extremes of temperature are so great in Sib-
eria that it is often referred to as the 'cold pole of
the earth'. Some of the lowest temperatures in the
world are recorded in Verkhoyansk (68'N 113'E and
only 100 metres/330 feef in altitude).where -68 'C
(-90 "F) was once recordeed. This is, in fact, 94'C
(170'F) colder than Kuala Lumpur! In North Amer-
ica, the extremes are less severe, because of the con-
tinent's lesser east-west stretch. The lowest mid-
winter means in the cold Mackenzie Valley are not
lower than -57 "C (-70'F).
JFMAMJJASON
months
JFMAMJJASO
-28 -27 -21 -10 -t 
6 12 .|l 6 _3
-f9 -17 -6 14 30 43 U 52 42 27
f3 t5 23 23 23 48 56 69 58 36
0.5 0.6 0.9 0.9 0.9 't.9 2.2 2.7 2.3 1.4
-o
.=<
=9
G.=
PE
-o
=P
o,=
CF
!Etr
16/60
10/50
4t40
-1l30
-7t20
-12t10
-171O
-231-10
-291-20
.E
o
3r.r.
FoLd
E'
o
.9
o
ir!
OoTD
E
0)
76t3
0/o
Churchill
Temp.'C:
t.:
Precip. (mml:
(inch6l
soN
11 4 -2
52 40 2A
56 36 4t
2.2 1-4 1.6
D
N 
D 
range/total
-14 -24 4o'c
-t | 73'F.
25 18 406 mm
'1 0 0.7 16 inch6
Fig. 23.2(b) Siberian Climate in Canada
Place: Churchill, Manitoba, Canada (58' N. 94' W)
Altitude: 13 metres (tl4 feet)
Annual precipitation: 406 mm (16 inches)
Annual temperature range: 40 "C |'12"-l-28 "Clt3'F
(54"-(- l9'Fl
With such low temperatures in the cold season,
heavy snowfall can be expected. Frosts occur as ear-
ly as August and by September lakes and ponds are
already ice-bound. All over the U.S.S.R., nearly all
the rivers are frozen. The number of days in which
the rivers are frozen increases from south to north.
In normal years, the Volga is ice-covered for about
150 days, while those further north (e.g. the lower
courses of the Ob, Lena and Yenisey) are ice-cov-
ered for more than 210 days or 7 months! Occasion-
ally cold, northerly polar winds such as the blizzards
of Canada and buran of Eurasia blow violently at
80 km.p.h (50 m.p.h.) or more and at a temperature
of 28 'C (50'F) below freezing-point. The powdery
snow-flakes are blown around in the lower atmos-
phere and visibility is greatly reduced. Conditions
are so unbearable that Siberia is very sparsely pop-
ulated but it is gradually being developed.
Precipitation. The interiors of the Eurasian conti-
nent are so remote from maritime influence that
annual precipitation cannot be high. Generally
speaking, a total of 380 to 635 mm (15 to 25 inches)
is typical of the annual precipitation of this sub-
Arctic type of climate. It is quite well distributed
throughout the year, with a summer maximum from
convectional rain when the continental interiors are
2t7

greatly heated (mid-summer temPeratures of 16o to
24"C (60 " to 75 "F) are quite usual and the maximum
recorded in Siberia is a real surprise - 
39 "C
(102 "F)! In winter the precipitation is in the form of
snow as mean temperature are well below freezing
all the time.
The precipitation rhythm can best be grasped
from the two representative stations chosen, in
Figs. 23.2(a) and 23.2(b). Moscow with an annual
precipitation of 533 mm (21 inches) has most of the
rainfall concentrated in the warmer months (June-
September). There is no month without some form
of moisture. In a region where overall temperature
is low, evaporation is not rapid and the relative
humidity is high, this small amount of precipitation
is adequate for tree growth. The conifers, which re-
quire little moisture, and transpire an equally small
amount, are best suited to this type of sub-Arctic
climate.
In Churchill, Fig. 23.2(b), the annual precipita-
tion is just 406 mm (16 inches) with a distinct sum-
mer maximum.
The total precipitation of the Siberian climate is
determined by such factors as altitude, latitude,
proximity to the poles, amount of exposure to influ-
ences by Westerlies, (on western parts of conti-
nents),temperate monsoons (on the eastern parts of
continents) and the penetration of the cyclones.
European U.S.S.R. usually has more than 508 mm
(20 inches) of annual precipitation because of some
on-coming Westerlies and the periodic penetration
of cyclones. Eastern Siberia also has over 508 mm
(20 inches), being moistened by the S.E. Monsoon
from the Pacific Ocean. Central Siberia and Canada
have about 380 mm (15 inches), due to their conti'
nentality and lack of sea influence. Polewards and
southwards, the amount again decreases to only
305 mm (12 inches) or less. The cold, dry air of the
Fig 23.3 Some coniferous trees
Spruce
north is incapable of holding moisture, and in the
south are the semi-arid steppes.
Snow falls nearly everywhere in the U.S.S.R. in
the long, cold winter. The amount varies from place
to place. It is heaviest in the northern tundra and in
the Siberian taiga, where a thickness of several
metres is common. Permanent snowfields like those
of the Alps or the Himalayas are absent, because
any accumulation of snow is melted with the return
of spring and the warm summer. Frozen rivers are
thawed, causing a rise in the water-level and exten-
sive floods occur. The lower courses of the Ob, Lena
and Yenisey are marshy and ill-drained. On the
other hand, the presence of a thick mantle of snow
is not without its blessings. Snow is a poor conductor
of heat and protects the ground from the severe cold
above, which may be as much as 17o to 28'C (30" to
50 'F) colder! It is also provides moisture for the veg-
etation when the snow melts in spring. When the
ground is ploughed and the leached, acidic podzolic
soil is improved, the continental interiors of the con-
iferous forest belt are capable of supporting some
agriculture.
Natural Vegetation
No other trees are so well adapted as the conifers to
withstand such an inhospitable environment as the
Siberian type of climate. The coniferous forest belts
of Eurasia and North America are the richest
sources of softwood for use in building construction,
furniture, matches, paper and pulp, rayon and other
branches of the chemicals industry. The world's
greatest softwood producers are the U.S.S.R., the
U.S.A., Canada and the Fenoscandian countries
(Finland, Norway and Sweden). In the production
of wood pulp (by both chemical and mechanical
methods). the U.S.A. is the leader. But in the field
W
Poplar
Birch
Douglas fir
Cedar

23.A Coniferous forests on the eastern Rockies, Alberta,
Canada National Film Board of Canada
of newsprint, Canada has outstripped all other pro-
ducers, accounting for 36 per cent of the world's
total annual production. The more accessible coni-
ferous forests have reached the limit of production
but the relatively inaccessible taiga of Siberia will
remain the richest reserye of temperate softwood.
There are four major species in the coniferous for-
ests (Plate 23.A and Fig.23.3).
L Pine, e.g. white pine, red pine, Scots pine, Jack
pine, lodgepole pine, Jeffrey pine.
2. Fir, e.g. Douglas fir, balsam fir, silver fir.
3. Spruce, e.g.Norway spruce, Sitka spruce.
4. Larch, (a very hardy deciduous tree found with
conifers).
Their presence in pure stands and the existence of
only a few species are a great advantage in com-
mercial forest exploitation.
Relationship between Glimate and
Natural Vegetation
l. Coniferous forests are of moderate density. Unlike
the equatorial rain forests which are luxuriant and
contain trees of various heights, the coniferous for-
ests are more uniform and grow straight and tall, up
to a height of about 30 metres (100 feet). Where the
poleward limit of tree growth is approached the trees
are widely spaced, and give way to tundra vegetation
(Fig. n.q.
2. Almost all conifers are evergreen. The low
annual temperature with more than half the year
below the growing-point temperature of 6 "C (43'F),
means that evergreens are at an advantage. Growth
can begin as soon as growing-point is reached in
spring. The conifer has a two-year fructification
cycle. The seeds are pollinated in one year and dis-
persed in the following year. There is no annual
replacement of new leaves as in deciduous trees. The
same leaf remains on the tree for as long as five
years. Food is stored in the trunks, and the bark is
thick to protect the trunk from excessive cold.
3. Conifers are conical in shape. This is another
adaptation to survive the sub-Arctic climate. The
sloping branches prevent snow accumulation which
may snap the branches. It also offers little grip to the
strong winds (Plate 23.8).
2t9

TAIGA
Deree coniferous forcst
Trees.more scattered and smalle,,
dwarl willows, birches appear
MaEh plants and sedges
ftlm
0/0
611'82
1213.65
1a/5.4A
7.31
Fig.23.4 Diagram to show changes in vegetation in a jour-
ney Polewards from the Taiga Zone
4. Leaves are small, thick, leathery and needle-
shaped. This is to check excessive transpiration. The
leaf surface is reduced to the minimum, as transpir-
ation can be quite rapid in the warm summer due to
intense continental heating.
5. There is little undergrowth. The podzolized soils
of the coniferous forests are poor. They are exces-
sively leached and very acidic. The evergreen leaves
provide little leaf-fall for humus formation, and the
rate of decomposition of the leathery 'needles' in
a region of such low temperature is slow. All these
factors are deterrents to the growth of much under-
growth. Absence of direct sunlight and the short
duration of summer are other contributory factors
to a sparse undergrowth, but where trees are widely
spaced near the tree-line heath and tundra plants
cover the intervening ground.
23.B Winter in a coniferous forest. The sloping branches
prevent the accumulation of snow. Servizio Editoriale Foto-
grafico
Besides the continental interiors of the higher lat-
itudes, coniferous forests are also found in other cli-
matic regions wherever altitude reduces the
temperature. The conifers are, in fact, the dominant
trees of the mountainous districts in both the tem-
perate and tropical countries. But on very steep
slopes where soils are immature or non-existent,
even the conifer cannot survive.
Economic Development
The coniferous forest regions of the northern
hemisphere are comparatively little developed. In
Canada, eastern Europe and Asiatic Russia, large
tracts of coniferous forests are still untouched. Only
in the more accessible areas are the forests cleared
for lumbering. The various species of pine, fir, larch
and spruce are felled and transported to the saw-
mills for the extraction of temperate softwoods.
There is little agriculture, as few crops can survive
in the sub-Arctic climate of these northerly lands.
The long, cold winter, the frozen soils and the low
mean annual temperature throughout the year'ex-
clude all but the frardiest crops. Only in the more
sheltered valleys and the lands bordering the step-
pes are some cereals (barley, oats, rye) and root
crops (potatoes) raised for local needs. Many of the
Samoyeds and Yakuts of Siberia, and some Cana-
dians are engaged in hunting, trapping and fishing.
We shall deal with two of the major activities in
greater detail.
1. Trapping. Many fur-bearing animals inhabit the
northerly lands of Canada and Eurasia. Wherever
the cold is keenest, the quality and thickness of the
fur also increases. Consequently, the most severe
winters produce the finest furs which fetch the high-
est prices. In Canada, trappers and hunters, armed
with modern automatic rifles, reside in log cabins in
the midst of the coniferous forests to track down

these animals. Their lives are hard and precarious
at times, but the rewards are great if the 'harvests'
are good. Mink, beaver, muskrat, ermine, and silver
fox are the most important fur-bearing animals
sought-after in Canada. The Hudson Bay Company
has many stations scattered in the northern regions
to trade in furs with the Canadian trappers and hunt-
ers. To ensure a more regular supply of furs, many
fur farms have been established in Canada. Animals
such as the silver fox and ermine are kept in captiv-
ity, and skinned when the furs reach a marketable
stage. They fetch high prices in sophisticated cities
like New York, London, Paris, Rome and Zurich,
where the pelts are processed as attractive fur coats
and women's handbags. [n Siberia, other fur-bearing
animals are trapped. These are squirrels, otters,
bears, sables, lynxes, martens, and foxes. As in Can-
ada, fur-farming has now replaced hunting of wild
animals in many parts of Siberia as the main source
of furs.
2. Lumbering. This is probably the most important
occupation of the Siberian type of climate. The vast
reserves of coniferous forests provide the basis for
the lumbering industry. The trees are felled for
many purposes (Plate 23.C and D.).
(a) Sawmilling. This processes the logs into
sawn timber, plywood, planks, hardboard and other
constructional woods.
23.D Logs are poled into a factory from the Ottawa river,
Ouebec, Canada National Film Board of Canada
23.C A lumberjack uses a power-saw to cut up a fallen tree,
Ouebec, Canada National Film Board of Canada

(b) Paper and pulp industry. Timber is pulped
by both chemical and mechanical means to make
wood pulp, the raw material for paper-making and
newsprint.The development of the printing industry
has made paper and pulp indispensable. Canada and
the U.S.A. are leading producers of the world's sup-
plies of newsprint and wood pulp respectively.
(c) ,4s a fuel. Less than a quarter of the world's
softwood is burnt as fuel because its industrial uses
are far more significant. In contrast, almost three-
quarters of the world's hardwoods are burnt as fuel,
particularly tropical hardwoods where the trees
occur in mixed stands.
(d) As an industrial raw materrcl. Timber has
a wide range of uses. In Sweden, matches form a
major export ite.m. From other temperate countries,
timber is used for making furniture, wood-carvings,
toys, crates and packing cases. From the by-products
of the timber, many chemically processed articles
are derived such as rayon, turpentine, varnishes,
paints, dyes, liquid resins, wood-alcohols, disinfec-
tants and cosmetics.
Commercial exploitation of the coniferous forests
is characterized by the following features:
i. The conifers are limited in species. Pine, spruce
and fir are the most important in the northern for-
ests, while larch is more predominant in the warmer
south. They occur in homogeneous groups and not
mixed as in the tropical forests. This not only saves
time and costs, but also enhances the commercial
value of the felled timber.
ii. In these northerly latitudes, agriculture is almost
impossible and lumbering replaces farming in the
continental interiors. Even where crops are culti-
vated, farmers are idle in the winter months and can
supplement their income by doing part-time lum-
bering in the forests, as they do in most parts of
Europe.
iii. Lumbering is normally carried out in the winter
when the sap ceases to flow. This makes felling much
simpler. The snow-covered ground also makes log-
ging and haulage a relatively easy job. The logs are
dragged to the rivers and float to the sawmills down-
stream when the rivers thaw in spring. This has
greatly assisted the development of the lumbering
industry in eastern Canada and Sweden. Unfortu-
nately, over the greater part of Siberia, all the rivers
drain polewards into the Arctic Ocean which is fro-
zen for three-quarters of the year, and there are few
sawmills there. With the use of the Northern Sea
Route, which links Murmansk and Vladivostok via
the Arctic Ocean, development is increasing. Cheap
hydro-electricity for driving the sawmills is har-
nessed in the mountainous uplands of North Amer-
ica and Europe and has greatly assisted the
lumbering industry.
Ouestions and Exercises
1. Compare and contrast deciduous forests and
coniferous forests in respect of the following:
(a) distribution;
(b) vegetational characteristics;
(c) climatic influence;
(d) economic development.
2. Distinguish between hardwoods and soft-
woods. What industrial uses are made of them?
Account for their large-scale production for
export in any one country.
3. Give a reasoned account of any three of. the
following:
(a) The annual temperature range of Moscow
is 30 "C (54 "F).
(b) The annual precipitation of Leningrad is
not more than 508 mm (20 inches).
(c) The lower courses of the Siberian rivers
are frozen for as long as seven months.
(d) One of the coldest spots on the globe is
Verkhoyansk with a record lowest temper-
ature of -68 "C (-90'F).
What is meant by:
(a) the taiga;
(b) the veld;
(c) the selvas.
Account for the distribution and characteristics
of any rwo of them.
Describe the role played by forest products in
the economy of either Canada or Sweden.
(a) Describe the types of vegetation found in
the cool temperate zone.
(b) To what extent does the climate, soil and
other factors affect their distribution?
(a) With reference to examples taken from
one large continent, distinguish the cli-
mates found within the cool temperate
belt.
(b) In what ways are they different from the
4.
5.
6.
7.
'r11

8.
climates found north and south of the belt?
(a) State the climate found in the following
areas:
i. The Low Countries of Europe;
ii. The Caribbean islands;
iii. Central Chile;
iv. Japan.
(b) For any two of them relate the climatic
influence on the local vegetation.
(a) The cool temperate continental (Siberian
type) of climate is confined entirely to the
northern hemisphere. Explain geographi-
cally why this is so.
(b) In what ways is this type of climate com-
parable to that of the warm temperate con-
tinental (Steppe) type of climate?
The cool temperate continental regions are
important for lumbering and fur trapping.
(a) Give reasons why these occupations are
suitable here.
(b) Why are other types of agriculture com-
paratively undeveloPed?
D temperature changes are very ex-
lreme
5. The coniferous forests are characte.
rized by the following features er-
cept
A evergreen throughout the year
B the leaves are small and needle-
shaped
C the undergrowth is very dense
D the trunks are tall, slender and
straight
10.
9.
Sample Objective Ouestions
1. The cool temperate continental
climate is experienced in
A Japan
-B southern Chile
C New Zealand
D Finland
2. Lumbering in the coniferous fore.sts
is much easier than in the troPical
rain forests for these reasons except
A Haulage operations are done on
snow-covered ground
B The existence of a homogenous
species of trees
C The conifers occur onlY on low-
lands
D The cool climate is invigorating
3. The cool temperate continental re-
gions are sparsely populated owing
to
A their interior location
B the absence of minerals
C the lack of vegetation
D the damp environment
4. The cool temperate continental
Siberian climate does not attract
many people because
A the rivers flood extensively in the
winter
B heat waves in summer are un-
bearable
C blizzatds blow all year round

