CHAPTER 3 Concept of the Constitution 
MEANING 
The term ‘constitution’ is derived from the Latin word constituere, which means ‘to establish’ or ‘to set-
up’. In the present sense, the term ‘constitution’ refers to a set of principles, which specify the 
organisation and working of the government and the relationship between the government and the 
people in terms of their rights and duties. 
The constitution is variously described as the ‘fundamental law of the land’, ‘supreme law of the state’, 
‘basic law of the country’, ‘instrument of the government’, ‘rules of the state’, ‘basic structure of the 
polity’, ‘grundnorm of the country’ and so on. 
Political scientists and Constitutional experts have defined the constitution in the following way: 
Gilchrist: “The constitution consists of that body of rules or laws which determine the organization of 
government, the distribution of powers to the various organs of government, and the general principles 
on which these powers are to be exercised.”1 
Gettell: “The fundamental principles that determine the form of a state are called its constitution. These 
include the method of which the state is organised, the distribution of its sovereign powers among the 
various organs of government, the scope and manner of exercise of governmental functions, and the 
relation of the government to the people over whom its authority is exercised”.2 
Wheare: “The Constitution describes the whole system of government of a country, the collection of 
rules which establish and regulate or govern the government.”3 
Wade and Phillips: “A constitution is a document having a special legal sanctity which sets out the 
framework and the principal functions of the organs of the Government of a State and declares the 
principles governing the operation of those organs.”4 
FUNCTIONS 
The constitutional scholar, Elliot Bulmer, has very well identified the functions (or purposes) of a 
constitution. His list is comprehensive and includes the following points5: 
1. It can declare and define the boundaries of the political community. 
2. It can declare and define the nature and authority of the political community. 
3. It can express the identity and values of a national community. 
4. It can declare and define the rights and duties of citizens. 
5. It can establish and regulate the political institutions of the community. 
6. It can divide or share power between different layers of government or sub-state communities. 
7. It can declare the official religious identity of the state and demarcate relationships between 
sacred and secular authorities. 

 
8. It can commit states to particular social, economic, or developmental goals. 
QUALITIES 
There are some qualities (or characteristics) of a good constitution. These are explained below: 
1. Brevity: A constitution should be precise and should not contain unwanted provisions. A lengthy 
constitution with too many details creates confusion in the interpretation of its clauses. 
2. Clarity: A constitution should specify its provisions in clear terms. A complicated language would 
reduce the degree of its understanding. 
3. Definiteness: A constitution should contain a definite meaning for its provisions. The ambiguous 
and different meanings would increase the discretion of the judges in their interpretation. 
4. Comprehensiveness: A constitution should be comprehensive in laying down the powers of the 
government as well as the rights and duties of the citizens. This would reduce the scope for 
controversies and litigations. 
5. Suitability: A constitution should reflect the needs and aspirations of the people. It must be 
suitable to the historical, socio-cultural, economic and political conditions of the nation. 
6. Stability: A constitution should facilitate political stability and should not allow easy tampering. 
This would strengthen the obedience of the citizens to the constitution. 
7. Adaptability: A constitution should be dynamic and not static. It should be able to adapt itself to 
changing situations and requirements. It should be a living document. 
CLASSIFICATION 
The constitutions are classified into the following types: 
1.  Evolved and Enacted 
On the basis of evolution, the constitutions are classified into evolved and enacted constitutions. An 
evolved constitution is the outcome of a slow and gradual evolutionary process. Its provisions are 
contained in the form of conventions, practices, principles, and judicial decisions. It is also known as a 
cumulative constitution and the British Constitution is a good example in this regard. 
An enacted constitution, on the other hand, is deliberately made by a constituent assembly or a 
constitutional council or promulgated by a king or parliament. Its provisions are contained in the form of 
a book or a document or a series of documents. It is also known as a conventional constitution and the 
American and Indian Constitutions are the good examples in this regard. 
2.  Written and Unwritten 
On the basis of incorporation of provisions, the constitutions are classified into written and unwritten 
constitutions. A written constitution is one in which the provisions are incorporated in the form of a 
book or a document or a series of documents. It is consciously formulated and adopted by a body known 
as the constituent assembly or the constitutional convention or by any other name. It is also known as a 

 
documentary constitution or a codified constitution. The constitutions of the USA, Canada, Japan, France 
and India are some of the good examples in this regard. 
An unwritten constitution, on the other hand, is one in which most of the provisions are not 
incorporated in the form of a book or a document or a series of documents. It is found in the form of 
conventions, practices, principles, charters, statutes, and judicial decisions. It is a product of historical 
evolution and not deliberately formulated by a body. It is also known as a non-documentary constitution 
or an uncodified constitution and the constitutions of UK, New Zealand and Israel are the good examples 
in this regard. 
The distinction between a written constitution and an unwritten constitution is more or less the same as 
is between an evolved constitution and an enacted constitution. 
3.  Rigid and Flexible 
Based on the method of amendment, the constitutions are classified into rigid and flexible constitutions. 
This classification was given by Lord James Bryce6. 
A rigid constitution is one, which cannot be amended in the same manner as the ordinary laws. It 
requires a special procedure for its amendment. In other words, it makes a distinction between the 
constitutional law and the ordinary law. A flexible constitution, on the other hand, is one which can be 
amended in the same manner as the ordinary laws. It does not require a special procedure for its 
amendment. In other words, it does not make a distinction between the constitutional law and the 
ordinary law. 
A flexible constitution is also known as an elastic constitution and the constitutions of UK and New 
Zealand are some good examples in this regard. A rigid constitution is also known as an inelastic 
constitution and the constitutions of the USA, Australia and Switzerland are some examples in this 
regard. The Constitution of India is neither rigid nor flexible, but a synthesis of both. 
4.  Federal and Unitary 
Based on the nature of relationship between the national government and the regional governments, 
the constitutions are classified into federal and unitary constitutions. A federal constitution is one which 
provides for a division of power between the national government and the regional governments. It 
enables them to operate in their respective jurisdictions independently. A unitary constitution, on the 
other hand, is one which provides for the concentration of power in the hands of the national 
government. It makes the regional governments to operate as the subordinate agencies of the national 
government and exercise only such powers which may be delegated to them by the national 
government. 
Federal constitution is prevalent in the USA, Switzerland, Australia, Canada, Russia, Brazil, and some 
other states. Unitary constitution is prevalent in the UK, France, Japan, China, Italy, Norway, and other 
states. The Constitution of India contains both the federal provisions as well as the unitary provisions. 
Hence, it was described as quasi-federal by K.C. Wheare. 
5.  Procedural and Prescriptive 

 
According to the constitutional scholar, Elliot Bulmer, two broad constitutional archetypes can be 
identified: the procedural and the prescriptive. The difference between these two types of constitutions 
relate to the nature and purposes of the document itself7. 
A procedural constitution defines the legal and political structures of public institutions and sets out the 
legal limits of government power to protect democratic processes and fundamental human rights. 
In addition to describing how the government functions, a prescriptive constitution assumes (or 
attempts to impose) a broad consensus on common societal goals that public authorities must strive to 
achieve. 
CONSTITUTIONALISM AND CONSTITUTIONAL GOVERNMENT 
1.  Meaning 
The concepts of constitution and constitutionalism are closely related to each other. But, there are a few 
differences between them; like: 
1. A country may have a constitution but not constitutionalism, as in the case of a dictatorship. 
Unlimited power jeopardise freedom of the people and absolute power corrupts absolutely. 
Therefore, a constitution should be permeated with constitutionalism8. 
2. Constitutionalism connotes, in essence, limited government or limitation on government. It is 
the antithesis of arbitrary powers. Only when the constitution of a country seeks to decentralise 
power instead of concentrating it at one point and also imposes other restraints thereon, does a 
country have not only a constitution but constitutionalism9. 
3. The concept of constitutionalism is that of a polity governed by or under a constitution that 
ordains essentially limited government and rule of law as opposed to arbitrary, despotic, 
authoritarian or totalitarian rule. Constitutional government should necessarily be democratic 
government. Arbitrary power in the hands of any individual or institution – even if conferred by a 
constitutional document – is a negation of the concept of constitutionalism10. 
4. Constitutionalism desires a political order in which the power of the government are limited. It is 
another name for the concept of a limited, and for this reason, a “civilized” government. The real 
justification of the constitution finds place in having a “limited government” and of requiring 
those who govern to conform to laws and rules11. 
2.  Definition 
The concepts of constitutionalism and constitutional government have been defined in the following 
way: 
Friedrich: “Constitutionalism provides a system of effective restraints upon governmental action. It is a 
body of rules ensuring fairplay, thus rendering the government responsible”12. 
Roucek: “Constitutionalism means essentially limited government. It is the antithesis of government by 
the unrestrained will be of rulers. Regardless of the actual form of effectiveness of restraints, it assumes 
limitations on government as opposed to arbitrary government”13. 

 
Wheare: “Constitutional government means something more than a government according to the terms 
of a constitution. It means government according to rule as opposed to arbitrary government; it means 
government limited by the terms of a constitution, not government limited only by the desires and 
capacities of those who exercise power”14. 
Ybema: “A form of government can only be classified as constitutional when the rulers are subject to a 
body of rules and principles, which limit the exercise of their power. Constitutional government is the 
antithesis of arbitrary rule”15. 
3.  Elements 
The constitutional scholar, Louis Henkin, identified eight elements (features or principles) of 
constitutionalism. These are mentioned below16: 
1. Popular sovereignty 
2. Rule of law 
3. Democratic government (responsible and accountable government) 
4. Separation of powers (checks and balances) 
5. An independent judiciary 
6. Civilian control of the military 
7. Police governed by law and judicial control 
8. Respect for individual rights 
1Gilchrist, R.N., Principles of Political Science, 1961, p. 211. 
2Gettell, R.G., Political Science, 1956, p. 244. 
3Wheare, K.C., Modern Constitutions, 1956, p. 1. 
4Wade and Phillips, Constitutional Law, 1965, p. 1. 
5Elliot Bulmer, What is a Constitution? Principles and Concepts, International IDEA Constitution – 
Building Primer 1, Second Edition, 2017, International Institute for Democracy and Electoral Assistance, 
pp. 6–7. 
6Bryce, J., Studies in History and Jurisprudence, Volume 1, p. 127. 
7Same as footnote 5 above, pp. 9–10. 
8Mamta Rao, Constitutional Law, Second Edition, EBC Publishing Ltd., Lucknow, 2021, p. 8. 
9Ibid. 
10Kashyap, Dr. Subhash C., Constitutional Law of India, Second Edition, Volume 1, Universal Law 
Publishing, Gurgaon, 2015, p. 7. 

 
11Johari, J.C., Comparative Politics, Fourth Edition, Sterling Publishers Private Limited, New Delhi, 2011, p. 
217. 
12Friedrich, Carl J., Constitutional Government and Democracy, Oxford and IBH, Calcutta, 1964, p. 25. 
13Roucek, J.S. and Others, Introduction to Political Science, 1954, p. 981. 
14Wheare, K.C., Modern Constitutions, Oxford University Press, London, 1956, p. 137. 
15Ybema, S.P., Constitutionalism and Civil Liberties, Leiden University Press, Leiden, 1973, p. 1. 
16Henkin, Louis, A New Birth of Constitutionalism: Genetic Influences and Genetic Defects, Chapter 2 in 
Constitutionalism, Identity, Difference and Legitimacy: Theoretical Perspectives, Edited by Michel 
Rosenfeld, Duke University Press, Durham, 1994, pp. 39–54.