CHAPTER 4: Salient Features of the Constitution 
 
The Indian Constitution is unique in its contents and spirit. Though borrowed from almost every 
Constitution of the world, the Constitution of India has several salient features that distinguish it from 
the Constitutions of the other countries. 
It should be noted at the outset that a number of original features of the Constitution (as adopted in 
1949) have undergone a substantial change, on account of several amendments, particularly 7th, 42nd, 
44th, 73rd, 74th, 97th and 101st Amendments. In fact, the 42nd Amendment Act (1976) is known as 
‘Mini-Constitution’ due to the important and large number of changes made by it in various parts of the 
Constitution. However, in the Kesavananda Bharati case1 (1973), the Supreme Court ruled that the 
constituent power of Parliament under Article 368 does not enable it to alter the ‘basic structure’ of the 
Constitution. 
SALIENT FEATURES OF THE CONSTITUTION 
The salient features of the Constitution, as it stands today, are as follows: 
1.  Lengthiest Written Constitution 
Constitutions are classified into written, like the American Constitution, or unwritten, like the British 
Constitution. The Constitution of India is the lengthiest of all the written Constitutions of the world. It is 
a very comprehensive, elaborate and detailed document. 
Originally (1949), the Constitution contained a Preamble, 395 Articles (divided into 22 Parts) and 8 
Schedules. Presently, it consists of a Preamble, about 470 Articles (divided into 25 Parts) and 12 
Schedules. The various amendments carried out since 1951 have deleted about 20 Articles and one Part 
(VII) and added about 95 Articles, four Parts (IVA, IXA, IXB and XIVA) and four Schedules (9, 10, 11 and 
12). No other Constitution in the world has so many Articles and Schedules2. 
The Parts, Important Articles and Schedules of the Constitution of India are mentioned in Tables 
4.1, 4.2 and 4.3 respectively. 
Four factors have contributed to the elephantine size of our Constitution. They are: 
1. Geographical factors, that is, the vastness of the country and its diversity. 
2. Historical factors, e.g., the influence of the Government of India Act of 1935, which was bulky. 
3. Single Constitution for both the Centre and the states. 
4. Dominance of legal luminaries in the Constituent Assembly. 
The Constitution contains not only the fundamental principles of governance, but also detailed 
administrative provisions. Further, those matters which in other modern democratic countries have been 
left to the ordinary legislation or established political conventions have also been included in the 
constitutional document itself in India. 

 
Till 2019, the erstwhile State of Jammu and Kashmir had its own constitution and thus enjoyed a special 
status by virtue of Article 370 of the Constitution of India. In 2019, this special status was abolished by a 
presidential order known as “The Constitution (Application to Jammu and Kashmir) Order, 2019”. This 
order superseded the earlier order known as “The Constitution (Application to Jammu and Kashmir) 
Order, 1954”. The 2019 order extended all the provisions of the Constitution of India to Jammu and 
Kashmir also. 
Further, the Jammu and Kashmir Reorgani sation Act, 2019, bifurcated the erstwhile State of Jammu and 
Kashmir into two separate Union territories, namely, the Union territory of Jammu & Kashmir and the 
Union territory of Ladakh. 
2.  Drawn from Various Sources 
The Constitution of India has borrowed most of its provisions from the Constitutions of various other 
countries as well as from the Government of India Act of 19353. Dr. B.R. Ambedkar proudly acclaimed 
that the Constitution of India has been framed after ‘ransacking all the known Constitutions of the 
World’4. 
The structural part of the Constitution is, to a large extent, derived from the Government of India Act of 
1935. The philosophical part of the Constitution (the Fundamental Rights and the Directive Principles of 
State Policy) derives its inspiration from the American and Irish Constitutions, respectively. The political 
part of the Constitution (the principle of Cabinet Government and the relations between the Executive 
and the Legislature) has been largely drawn from the British Constitution5. 
The other provisions of the Constitution have been drawn from the Constitutions of Canada, Australia, 
Germany, USSR (now Russia), France, South Africa, Japan and so on. 
The most profound influence and material source of the Constitution is the Government of India Act, 
1935. The Federal Scheme, Judiciary, Governors, Emergency Powers, the Public Service Commissions and 
most of the administrative details are drawn from this Act. More than half of the provisions of 
Constitution are identical to or bear a close resemblance to the Act of 19356. 
The features (provisions) of the Constitution that have been borrowed from various sources are 
mentioned in Table 4.4. 
3.  Blend of Rigidity and Flexibility 
Constitutions are also classified into rigid and flexible. A rigid Constitution is one that requires a special 
procedure for its amendment, as for example, the American Constitution. A flexible constitution, on the 
other hand, is one that can be amended in the same manner as the ordinary laws are made, as for 
example, the British Constitution. 
The Constitution of India is neither rigid nor flexible, but a synthesis of both. Article 368 provides for two 
types of amendments: 
1. Some provisions can be amended by a special majority of the Parliament, i.e., a two-third 
majority of the members of each House present and voting, and a majority of the total 
membership of each House. 

 
2. Some other provisions can be amended by a special majority of the Parliament and with the 
ratification by half of the total states. 
At the same time, some provisions of the Constitution can be amended by a simple majority of the 
Parliament in the manner of ordinary legislative process. Notably, these amendments do not come 
under Article 368. 
4.  Federal System with Unitary Bias 
The Constitution of India establishes a federal system of Government. It contains all the usual features of 
a federation, viz., two Governments, division of powers, written Constitution, supremacy of Constitution, 
rigidity of Constitution, independent judiciary and bicameralism. 
However, the Indian Constitution also contains many unitary or non-federal features, viz., a strong 
Centre, single Constitution, single citizenship, flexibility of Constitution, integrated judiciary, appointment 
of state governor by the Centre, all-India services, emergency provisions and so on. 
Moreover, the term ‘Federation’ has nowhere been used in the Constitution. Article 1, on the other 
hand, describes India as a ‘Union of States’ which implies two things: one, the Indian Federation is not 
the result of an agreement by the states; and two, no state has the right to secede from the federation. 
Hence, the Indian Constitution has been variously described as ‘federal in form but, unitary in spirit’, 
‘quasi-federal’ by K.C. Wheare, ‘bargaining federalism’ by Morris Jones, ‘co-operative federalism’ by 
Granville Austin, ‘federation with a centralising tendency’ by Ivor Jennings and so on. 
5.  Parliamentary form of Government 
The Constitution of India has opted for the British Parliamentary System of Government rather than the 
American Presidential System of Government. The parliamentary system is based on the principle of co-
operation and co-ordination between the legislative and executive organs while the presidential system 
is based on the doctrine of separation of powers between the two organs. 
The parliamentary system is also known as the ‘Westminster’7 Model of Government, responsible 
Government and Cabinet Government. The Constitution establishes the parliamentary system not only 
at the Centre, but also in the states. 
The features of parliamentary government in India are: 
1. Presence of nominal and real executives 
2. Majority party rule 
3. Collective responsibility of the executive to the legislature 
4. Membership of the ministers in the legislature 
5. Leadership of the Prime Minister or the Chief Minister 
6. Dissolution of the lower House (Lok Sabha or Assembly) 
Even though the Indian parliamentary system is largely based on the British pattern, there are some 
fundamental differences between the two. For example, the Indian Parliament is not a sovereign body 

 
like the British Parliament. Further, the Indian State has an elected head (republic) while the British State 
has a hereditary head (monarchy). 
In a parliamentary system whether in India or Britain, the role of the Prime Minister has become so 
significant and crucial that the political scientists like to call it a ‘Prime Ministerial Government’. 
6.  Synthesis of Parliamentary Sovereignty and Judicial Supremacy 
The doctrine of sovereignty of Parliament is associated with the British Parliament, while the principle of 
judicial supremacy with that of the American Supreme Court. 
Just as the Indian parliamentary system differs from the British system, the scope of judicial review 
power of the Supreme Court in India is narrower than that of what exists in the US. This is because the 
American Constitution provides for ‘due process of law’ against that of ‘procedure established by law’ 
contained in the Indian Constitution (Article 21). 
Therefore, the framers of the Indian Constitution have preferred a proper synthesis between the British 
principle of parliamentary sovereignty and the American principle of judicial supremacy. The Supreme 
Court, on the one hand, can declare the parliamentary laws as unconstitutional through its power of 
judicial review. The Parliament, on the other hand, can amend the major portion of the Constitution 
through its constituent power. 
7.  Integrated and Independent Judiciary 
The Indian Constitution establishes a judicial system that is integrated as well as independent. 
The Supreme Court stands at the top of the integrated judicial system in the country. Below it, there are 
high courts at the state level. Under a high court, there is a hierarchy of subordinate courts, that is, 
district courts and other lower courts. This single system of courts enforces both the central laws as well 
as the state laws, unlike in USA, where the federal laws are enforced by the federal judiciary and the 
state laws are enforced by the state judiciary. 
The Supreme Court is a federal court, the highest court of appeal, the guarantor of the fundamental 
rights of the citizens and the guardian of the Constitution. Hence, the Constitution has made various 
provisions to ensure its independence—security of tenure of the judges, fixed service conditions for the 
judges, all the expenses of the Supreme Court charged on the Consolidated Fund of India, prohibition on 
discussion on the conduct of judges in the legislatures, ban on practice after retirement, power to punish 
for its contempt vested in the Supreme Court, separation of the judiciary from the executive, and so on. 
8.  Fundamental Rights 
Part III of the Indian Constitution guarantees six fundamental rights to all the citizens: 
1. Right to Equality (Articles 14–18) 
2. Right to Freedom (Articles 19–22) 
3. Right against Exploitation (Articles 23–24) 
4. Right to Freedom of Religion (Articles 25–28) 

 
5. Cultural and Educational Rights (Articles 29–30) and 
6. Right to Constitutional Remedies (Article 32) 
Originally, the Constitution provided for seven Fundamental Rights. However, the Right to Property 
(Article 31) was deleted from the list of Fundamental Rights by the 44th Amendment Act of 1978. It is 
made a legal right under Article 300-A in Part XII of the constitution. 
The Fundamental Rights are meant for promoting the idea of political democracy. They operate as 
limitations on the tyranny of the executive and arbitrary laws of the legislature. They are justiciable in 
nature, that is, they are enforceable by the courts for their violation. The aggrieved person can directly 
go to the Supreme Court which can issue the writs of habeas corpus, 
mandamus, prohibition, certiorari and quo warranto for the restoration of his rights. 
However, the Fundamental Rights are not absolute and subject to reasonable restrictions. Further, they 
are not sacrosanct and can be curtailed or repealed by the Parliament through a Constitutional 
Amendment Act. They can also be suspended during the operation of a National Emergency except the 
rights guaranteed by Articles 20 and 21. 
9.  Directive Principles of State Policy 
According to Dr. B.R. Ambedkar, the Directive Principles of State Policy is a ‘novel feature’ of the Indian 
Constitution. They are enumerated in Part IV of the Constitution. They can be classified into three broad 
categories— socialistic, Gandhian and liberal–intellectual. 
The Directive Principles are meant for promoting the ideal of social and economic democracy. They seek 
to establish a ‘welfare state’ in India. However, unlike the Fundamental Rights, the directives are non-
justiciable in nature, that is, they are not enforceable by the courts for their violation. Yet, the 
Constitution itself declares that ‘these principles are fundamental in the governance of the country, and 
it shall be the duty of the state to apply these principles in making laws’. Hence, they impose a moral 
obligation on the state authorities for their application. But, the real force (sanction) behind them is 
political, that is, public opinion. 
In the Minerva Mills case8 (1980), the Supreme Court held that ‘the Indian Constitution is founded on 
the bedrock of the balance between the Fundamental Rights and the Directive Principles’. 
10.  Fundamental Duties 
The original constitution did not provide for the Fundamental Duties of the citizens. These were added 
during the operation of internal emergency (1975–77) by the 42nd Constitutional Amendment Act of 
1976 on the recommendation of the Swaran Singh Committee. The 86th Constitutional Amendment Act 
of 2002 added one more fundamental duty. 
Part IV-A of the Constitution (which consists of only one Article 51-A) specifies the eleven Fundamental 
Duties viz., to respect the Constitution, national flag and national anthem; to protect the sovereignty, 
unity and integrity of the country; to promote the spirit of common brotherhood amongst all the people; 
to preserve the rich heritage of our composite culture and so on. 

 
The fundamental duties serve as a reminder to citizens that while enjoying their rights, they also have to 
be quite conscious of duties they owe to their country, their society and to their fellow-citizens. 
However, like the Directive Principles, the duties are also non-justiciable in nature. 
11.  A Secular State 
The Constitution of India stands for a Secular State. Hence, it does not uphold any particular religion as 
the official religion of the Indian State. The following provisions of the Constitution reveal the secular 
character of the Indian State: 
1. The term ‘secular’ was added to the Preamble of the Indian Constitution by the 42nd 
Constitutional Amendment Act of 1976. 
2. The Preamble secures to all citizens of India liberty of belief, faith and worship. 
3. The State shall not deny to any person equality before the law or equal protection of the laws 
(Article 14). 
4. The State shall not discriminate against any citizen on the ground of religion (Article 15). 
5. Equality of opportunity for all citizens in matters of public employment (Article 16). 
6. All persons are equally entitled to freedom of conscience and the right to freely profess, practice 
and propagate any religion (Article 25). 
7. Every religious denomination or any of its sections shall have the right to manage its religious 
affairs (Article 26). 
8. No person shall be compelled to pay any taxes for the promotion of a particular religion (Article 
27). 
9. No religious instruction shall be provided in any educational institution maintained by the State 
(Article 28). 
10. Any section of the citizens shall have the right to conserve its distinct language, script or culture 
(Article 29). 
11. All minorities shall have the right to establish and administer educational institutions of their 
choice (Article 30). 
12. The State shall endeavour to secure for all the citizens a Uniform Civil Code (Article 44). 
The Western concept of secularism connotes a complete separation between the religion (the church) 
and the state (the politics). This negative concept of secularism is inapplicable in the Indian situation 
where the society is multireligious. Hence, the Indian Constitution embodies the positive concept of 
secularism, i.e., giving equal respect to all religions or protecting all religions equally. 
Moreover, the Constitution has also abolished the old system of communal representation9, that is, 
reservation of seats in the legislatures on the basis of religion. However, it provides for the temporary 
reservation of seats for the scheduled castes and scheduled tribes to ensure adequate representation to 
them. 

 
12.  Universal Adult Franchise 
The Indian Constitution adopts universal adult franchise as a basis of elections to the Lok Sabha and the 
state legislative assemblies. Every citizen who is not less than 18 years of age has a right to vote without 
any discrimination of caste, race, religion, sex, literacy, wealth and so on. The voting age was reduced to 
18 years from 21 years in 1989 by the 61st Constitutional Amendment Act of 1988. 
The introduction of universal adult franchise by the Constitution-makers was a bold experiment and 
highly remarkable in view of the vast size of the country, its huge population, high poverty, social 
inequality and overwhelming illiteracy.10 
Universal adult franchise makes democracy broad-based, enhances the self-respect and prestige of the 
common people, upholds the principle of equality, enables minorities to protect their interests and 
opens up new hopes and vistas for weaker sections. 
13.  Single Citizenship 
Though the Indian Constitution is federal and envisages a dual polity (Centre and states), it provides for 
only a single citizenship, that is, the Indian citizenship. 
In countries like the USA, on the other hand, each person is not only a US citizen but also a citizen of the 
particular state to which he belongs. Thus, he owes allegiance to both and enjoys dual sets of rights—
one conferred by the National government and another by the state government. 
In India, all citizens irrespective of the state in which they are born or reside enjoy the same political and 
civil rights of citizenship all over the country and no discrimination is made between them. 
Despite the constitutional provision for a single citizenship and uniform rights for all the people, India 
has been witnessing communal riots, class conflicts, caste wars, linguistic clashes and ethnic disputes. 
This means that the cherished goal of the Constitution-makers to build a united and integrated Indian 
nation has not been fully realised. 
14.  Independent Bodies 
The Indian Constitution not only provides for the legislative, executive and judicial organs of the 
Government (Central and state) but also establishes certain independent bodies. They are envisaged by 
the Constitution as the bulkworks of the democratic system of Government in India. These are: 
1. Election Commission to ensure free and fair elections to the Parliament, the state legislatures, 
the office of President of India and the office of Vice-president of India. 
2. Comptroller and Auditor-General of India to audit the accounts of the Central and state 
governments. He acts as the guardian of public purse and comments on the legality and 
propriety of Government expenditure. 
3. Union Public Service Commission to conduct examinations for recruitment to All-India 
services11 and higher Central services and to advise the President on disciplinary matters. 
4. State Public Service Commission in every state to conduct examinations for recruitment to state 
services and to advice the governor on disciplinary matters. 

 
The Constitution ensures the independence of these bodies through various provisions like security of 
tenure, fixed service conditions, expenses being charged on the Consolidated Fund of India, and so on. 
15.  Emergency Provisions 
The Indian Constitution contains elaborate emergency provisions to enable the President to meet any 
extraordinary situation effectively. The rationality behind the incorporation of these provisions is to 
safeguard the sovereignty, unity, integrity and security of the country, the democratic political system 
and the Constitution. 
The Constitution envisages three types of emergencies, namely: 
1. National emergency on the ground of war or external aggression or armed rebellion12 (Article 
352) 
2. State emergency (President’s Rule) on the ground of failure of Constitutional machinery in the 
states (Article 356) or failure to comply with the directions of the Centre (Article 365) 
3. Financial emergency on the ground of threat to the financial stability or credit of India (Article 
360) 
During an emergency, the Central Government becomes all-powerful and the states go into the total 
control of the centre. It converts the federal structure into a unitary one without a formal amendment of 
the Constitution. This kind of transformation of the political system from federal (during normal times) to 
unitary (during emergency) is a unique feature of the Indian Constitution. 
16.  Three-tier Government 
Originally, the Indian Constitution, like any other federal Constitution, provided for a dual polity and 
contained provisions with regard to the organisation and powers of the Centre and the states. Later, the 
73rd and 74th Constitutional Amendment Acts (1992) have added a third-tier of Government (i.e., local) 
which is not found in any other Constitution of the world. 
The 73rd Amendment Act of 1992 gave constitutional recognition to the panchayats (rural local 
governments) by adding a new Part IX and a new Schedule 11 to the Constitution. This Part provides for 
a three-tier system of panchayati raj in every state, i.e., Panchayats at the village, intermediate and 
district levels. Similarly, the 74th Amendment Act of 1992 gave constitutional recognition to the 
municipalities (urban local governments) by adding a new Part IX-A and a new Schedule 12 to the 
Constitution. This Part provides for three types of municipalities in every state, i.e., nagar panchayat for a 
transitional area, municipal council for a smaller urban area and municipal corporation for a larger urban 
area. 
17.  Co-operative Societies 
The 97th Constitutional Amendment Act of 2011 gave a constitutional status and protection to co-
operative societies. In this context, it made the following three changes in the Constitution: 
1. It made the right to form co-operative societies a fundamental right (Article 19). 
2. It included a new Directive Principle of State Policy on promotion of co-operative societies 
(Article 43-B). 

 
3. It added a new Part IX-B in the Constitution which is entitled as “The Co-operative Societies” 
(Articles 243-ZH to 243-ZT). 
The new Part IX-B contains various provisions to ensure that the co-operative societies in the country 
function in a democratic, professional, autonomous and economically sound manner. It empowers the 
Parliament in respect of multi-state cooperative societies and the state legislatures in respect of other 
co-operative societies to make the appropriate law. 
CRITICISM OF THE CONSTITUTION 
The Constitution of India, as framed and adopted by the Constituent Assembly of India, has been 
criticized on the following grounds: 
1.  A Borrowed Constitution 
The critics opined that the Indian Constitution contains nothing new and original. They described it as a 
‘borrowed Constitution’ or a ‘bag of borrowings’ or a ‘hotch-potch Constitution’ or a ‘patchwork’ of 
several documents of the world constitutions. However, this criticism is unfair and illogical. This is 
because, the framers of the Constitution made necessary modifications in the features borrowed from 
other constitutions for their suitability to the Indian conditions, at the same time avoiding their faults. 
While answering the above criticism in the Constituent Assembly, Dr. B.R. Ambedkar, the Chairman of 
the Drafting Committee, said: “One likes to ask whether there can be anything new in a Constitution 
framed at this hour in the history of the world. More than hundred years have rolled over when the first 
written Constitution was drafted. It has been followed by many countries reducing their constitutions to 
writing. What the scope of a Constitution should be has long been settled. Similarly, what are the 
fundamentals of a Constitution are recognized all over the world. Given these facts, all Constitutions in 
their main provisions must look similar. The only new things, if there can be any, in a Constitution framed 
so late in the day are the variations made to remove the faults and to accommodate it to the needs of 
the country. The charge of producing a blind copy of the Constitutions of other countries is based, I am 
sure, on an inadequate study of the Constitution”.13 
2.  A Carbon Copy of the 1935 Act 
The critics said that the framers of the Constitution have included a large number of the provisions of the 
Government of India Act of 1935 into the Constitution of India. Hence, they called the Constitution as a 
“Carbon Copy of the 1935 Act” or an “Amended Version of the 1935 Act”. For example, N. Srinivasan 
observed that the Indian Constitution is “both in language and substance a close copy of the Act of 
1935”. Similarly, Sir Ivor Jennings, a British Constitutionalist, said that “the Constitution derives directly 
from the Government of India Act of 1935 from which, in fact, many of its provisions are copied almost 
textually”. 
Further, P.R. Deshmukh, a member of the Constituent Assembly, commented that “the Constitution is 
essentially the Government of India Act of 1935 with only adult franchise added”. 
The same Dr. B.R. Ambedkar answered the above criticism in the Constituent Assembly in the following 
way: “As to the accusation that the Draft Constitution has reproduced a good part of the provisions of 
the Government of India Act, 1935, I make no apologies. There is nothing to be ashamed of in 
borrowing. It involves no plagiarism. Nobody holds any patent rights in the fundamental ideas of a 

 
Constitution. What I am sorry about is that the provisions taken from the Government of India Act, 1935, 
relate mostly to the details of administration”.14 
3.  Un-Indian or Anti-Indian 
According to the critics, the Indian Constitution is ‘un-Indian’ or ‘anti-Indian’ because it does not reflect 
the political traditions and the spirit of India. They said that the foreign nature of the Constitution makes 
it unsuitable to the Indian situation or unworkable in India. In this context, K. Hanumanthaiya, a member 
of the Constituent Assembly, commented: “We wanted the music of Veena or Sitar, but here we have the 
music of an English band. That was because our Constitution-makers were educated that 
way”.15 Similarly, Lokanath Misra, another member of the Constituent Assembly, criticized the 
Constitution as a “slavish imitation of the west, much more – a slavish surrender to the west”.16 Further, 
Lakshminarayan Sahu, also a member of the Constituent Assembly, observed: “The ideals on which this 
draft Constitution is framed have no manifest relation to the fundamental spirit of India. This 
Constitution would not prove suitable and would break down soon after being brought into operation”.17 
4.  An Un-Gandhian Constitution 
According to the critics, the Indian Constitution is un-Gandhian because it does not contain the 
philosophy and ideals of Mahatma Gandhi, fondly known as ‘Bapu’ or ‘Father of the Nation’ in India. 
They opined that the Constitution should have been raised and built upon village panchayats and district 
panchayats. In this context, the same member of the Constituent Assembly, K. Hanumanthaiya, said: 
“That is exactly the kind of Constitution Mahatma Gandhi did not want and did not envisage”.18 T. 
Prakasam, another member of the Constituent Assembly, attributed this lapse to Ambedkar’s non-
participation in the Gandhian movement and the antagonism towards the Gandhian ideas.19 
5.  Elephantine Size 
The critics stated that the Indian Constitution is too bulky and too detailed and contains some 
unnecessary elements. Sir Ivor Jennings, a British Constitutionalist, observed that the provisions 
borrowed were not always well-selected and that the constitution, generally speaking, was too long and 
complicated.20 
In this context, H.V. Kamath, a member of the Constituent Assembly, commented: “The emblem and the 
crest that we have selected for our assembly is an elephant. It is perhaps in consonance with that our 
constitution too is the bulkiest that the world has produced”.21 He also said: “I am sure, the House does 
not agree that we should make the Constitution an elephantine one”.22 
6.  Paradise of the Lawyers 
According to the critics, the Indian Constitution is too legalistic and very complicated. They opined that 
the legal language and phraseology adopted in the constitution makes it a complex document. The same 
Sir Ivor Jennings called it a “lawyer’s paradise”. 
In this context, H.K. Maheswari, a member of the Constituent Assembly, observed: “The draft tends to 
make people more litigious, more inclined to go to law courts, less truthful and less likely to follow the 
methods of truth and non-violence. If I may say so, the draft is really a lawyer’s paradise. It opens up vast 
avenues of litigation and will give our able and ingenious lawyers plenty of work to do”.23 

 
Similarly, P.R. Deshmukh, another member of the Constituent Assembly, said: “I should, however, like to 
say that the draft of the articles that have been brought before the House by Dr. Ambedkar seems to my 
mind to be far too ponderous like the ponderous tomes of a law manual. A document dealing with a 
constitution hardly uses so much of padding and so much of verbiage. Perhaps it is difficult for them to 
compose a document which should be, to my mind, not a law manual but a socio-political document, a 
vibrating, pulsating and life-giving document. But, to our misfortune, that was not to be, and we have 
been burdened with so much of words, words and words which could have been very easily 
eliminated.”24 
Table 4.1 Parts of the Constitution at a Glance 
Parts Subject Matter 
Articles Covered 
I 
The Union and its territory 
1 to 4 
II 
Citizenship 
5 to 11 
III 
Fundamental Rights 
12 to 35 
IV 
Directive Principles of State Policy 
36 to 51 
IV-A 
Fundamental Duties 
51-A 
V 
The Union Government 
52 to 151 
Chapter I – The Executive 
52 to 78 
Chapter II – Parliament 
79 to 122 
Chapter III – Legislative Powers of President 
Chapter IV – The Union Judiciary 
124 to 147 
Chapter V – Comptroller and Auditor-General of India 
148 to 151 
VI 
The State Governments 
152 to 237 
 
Chapter I – General 

 
Parts Subject Matter 
Articles Covered 
Chapter II – The Executive 
153 to 167 
Chapter III – The State Legislature 
168 to 212 
 
Chapter IV – Legislative Powers of Governor 
Chapter V – The High Courts 
214 to 232 
Chapter VI – Subordinate Courts 
233 to 237 
VII 
The States in Part B of the First Schedule (deleted) 
238 (deleted) 
VIII 
The Union Territories 
239 to 242 
IX 
The Panchayats 
243 to 243-0 
IX-A 
The Municipalities 
243-P to 243-ZG 
IX-B 
The Co-operative Societies 
243-ZH to 243-ZT 
X 
The Scheduled and Tribal Areas 
244 to 244-A 
XI 
Relations between the Union and the States 
245 to 263 
Chapter I – Legislative Relations 
245 to 255 
Chapter II – Administrative Relations 
256 to 263 
XII 
Finance, Property, Contracts and Suits 
264 to 300-A 
Chapter I – Finance 
264 to 291 
 
Chapter II – Borrowing 
292 to 293 

 
Parts Subject Matter 
Articles Covered 
Chapter III – Property, Contracts, Rights, Liabilities, Obligations and Suits 294 to 300 
Chapter IV – Right to Property 
300-A 
XIII 
Trade, Commerce and Intercourse within the Territory of India 
301 to 307 
XIV 
Services under the Union and the States 
308 to 323 
Chapter I – Services 
308 to 314 
Chapter II – Public Service Commissions 
315 to 323 
XIV-A Tribunals 
323-A to 323-B 
XV 
Elections 
324 to 329-A 
XVI 
Special Provisions relating to Certain Classes 
330 to 342-A 
XVII 
Official Language 
343 to 351 
Chapter I – Language of the Union 
343 to 344 
Chapter II – Regional Languages 
345 to 347 
Chapter III – Language of the Supreme Court, High Courts, and so on 
348 to 349 
Chapter IV – Special Directives 
350 to 351 
XVIII 
Emergency Provisions 
352 to 360 
XIX 
Miscellaneous 
361 to 367 
XX 
Amendment of the Constitution 

 
Parts Subject Matter 
Articles Covered 
XXI 
Temporary, Transitional and Special Provisions 
369 to 392 
XXII 
Short title, Commencement, Authoritative Text in Hindi and Repeals 
393 to 395 
Note: Part VII (dealing with Part-B states) was deleted by the 7th Amendment Act (1956). On the other 
hand, both Part IV-A and Part XIV-A were added by the 42nd Amendment Act (1976), while Part IX-A was 
added by the 74th Amendment Act (1992), and Part IX-B was added by the 97th Amendment Act (2011). 
Table 4.2 Important Articles of the Constitution at a Glance 
Articles Deals with 
Name and territory of the Union 
Formation of new states and alteration of areas, boundaries or names of existing states 
Laws inconsistent with or in derogation of the fundamental rights 
Equality before law 
Prohibition of discrimination on grounds of religion, race, caste, sex or place of birth 
Equality of opportunity in matters of public employment 
Abolition of untouchability 
Protection of certain rights regarding freedom of speech, etc. 
Protection of life and personal liberty 
21A 
Right to elementary education 
Freedom of conscience and free profession, practice and propagation of religion 

 
Articles Deals with 
Right of minorities to establish and administer educational institutions 
Remedies for enforcement of fundamental rights including writs 
State to secure a social order for the promotion of welfare of the people 
Organisation of village panchayats 
Uniform civil code for the citizens 
Provision for early childhood care and education to children below the age of 6 years. 
Promotion of educational and economic interests of scheduled castes, scheduled tribes and 
other weaker sections 
Separation of judiciary from executive 
Promotion of international peace and security 
51A 
Fundamental duties 
Power of president to grant pardons, etc., and to suspend, remit or commute sentences in 
certain cases 
Council of ministers to aid and advise the president 
Definition of Money Bills 
Annual financial statement (Budget) 
Power of president to promulgate ordinances during recess of Parliament 
Power of president to consult Supreme Court 

 
Articles Deals with 
Appointment of governor 
Power of governor to grant pardons, etc., and to suspend, remit or commute sentences in 
certain cases 
Council of ministers to aid and advise the governor 
Abolition or creation of legislative councils in states 
Assent to bills by governor (including reservation for President) 
Power of governor to promulgate ordinances during recess of the state legislature 
Power of high courts to issue certain writs 
239AA 
Special provisions with respect to Delhi 
Power of Parliament to legislate with respect to a matter in the State List in the national 
interest 
Adjudication of disputes relating to waters of inter-state rivers or river valleys 
Provisions with respect to an inter-state council 
Grants from the Union to certain states 
279A 
Goods and Services Tax Council 
Finance Commission 
Suits and proceedings 
300A 
Persons not to be deprived of property save by authority of law (Right to property) 

 
Articles Deals with 
Dismissal, removal or reduction in rank of persons employed in civil capacities under the 
Union or a state. 
All-India Services 
Public service commissions for the Union and for the states 
Functions of Public service commissions 
323-A 
Administrative tribunals 
Superintendence, direction and control of elections to be vested in an Election Commission 
Reservation of seats for scheduled castes and scheduled tribes in the House of the People 
Claims of scheduled castes and scheduled tribes to services and posts 
Proclamation of Emergency (National Emergency) 
Provisions in case of failure of constitutional machinery in states (President’s Rule) 
Provisions as to financial emergency. 
Effect of failure to comply with, or to give effect to, directions given by the Union (President’s 
Rule) 
Power of Parliament to amend the Constitution and procedure therefor 
Table 4.3 Schedules of the Constitution at a Glance 

 
Numbers 
Subject Matter 
Articles 
Covered 
First 
Schedule 
1. Names of the States and their territorial jurisdiction. 
1 and 4 
 
2. Names of the Union Territories and their extent. 
 
Second 
Schedule 
Provisions relating to the emoluments, allowances, privileges and so on 
of: 
59, 65, 75, 97, 
125, 148, 158, 
164, 186 and 
1. The President of India 
2. The Governors of States 
3. The Speaker and the Deputy Speaker of the Lok Sabha 
 
4. The Chairman and the Deputy Chairman of the Rajya Sabha 
 
5. The Speaker and the Deputy Speaker of the Legislative Assembly in 
the states 
6. The Chairman and the Deputy Chairman of the Legislative Council in 
the states 
 
7. The Judges of the Supreme Court 
 
8. The Judges of the High Courts 
9. The Comptroller and Auditor-General of India 
Third 
Schedule 
Forms of Oaths or Affirmations for: 
75, 84, 99, 
124, 148, 164, 
173, 188 and 

 
Numbers 
Subject Matter 
Articles 
Covered 
1. The Union ministers 
2. The candidates for election to the Parliament 
 
3. The members of Parliament 
 
4. The judges of the Supreme Court 
5. The Comptroller and Auditor-General of India 
6. The state ministers 
7. The candidates for election to the state legislature 
8. The members of the state legislature 
 
9. The judges of the High Courts 
 
Fourth 
Schedule 
Allocation of seats in the Rajya Sabha to the states and the union 
territories. 
4 and 80 
Fifth 
Schedule 
Provisions relating to the administration and control of scheduled areas 
and scheduled tribes. 
Sixth 
Schedule 
Provisions relating to the administration of tribal areas in the states of 
Assam, Meghalaya, Tripura and Mizoram. 
244 and 275 
Seventh 
Schedule 
Division of powers between the Union and the States in terms of List I 
(Union List), List II (State List) and List III (Concurrent List). Presently, the 
Union List contains 98 subjects (originally 97), the State List contains 59 
subjects (originally 66) and the Concurrent List contains 52 subjects 
(originally 47). 

 
Numbers 
Subject Matter 
Articles 
Covered 
Eighth 
Schedule 
Languages recognized by the Constitution. Originally, it had 14 languages 
but presently there are 22 languages. They are: Assamese, Bengali, 
Bodo, Dogri (Dongri), Gujarati, Hindi, Kannada, Kashmiri, Konkani, 
Mathili (Maithili), Malayalam, Manipuri, Marathi, Nepali, Odia, Punjabi, 
Sanskrit, Santhali, Sindhi, Tamil, Telugu and Urdu. Sindhi was added by 
the 21st Amendment Act of 1967; Konkani, Manipuri and Nepali were 
added by the 71st Amendment Act of 1992; and Bodo, Dongri, Maithili 
and Santhali were added by the 92nd Amendment Act of 2003. Oriya 
was renamed as ‘Odia’ by the 96th Amendment Act of 2011. 
344 and 351 
Ninth 
Schedule 
Acts and Regulations (originally 13 but presently 282)25 of the state 
legislatures dealing with land reforms and abolition of the zamindari 
system and of the Parliament dealing with other matters. This schedule 
was added by the 1st Amendment (1951) to protect the laws included in 
it from judicial review on the ground of violation of fundamental rights. 
However, the Supreme Court ruled that the laws included in this 
schedule after April 24, 197326, are open to judicial review. 
31-B 
Tenth 
Schedule 
Provisions relating to disqualification of the members of Parliament and 
State Legislatures on the ground of defection. This schedule was added 
by the 52nd Amendment Act of 1985, also known as Anti-defection Law. 
102 and 191 
Eleventh 
Schedule 
Specifies the powers, authority and responsibilities of Panchayats. It has 
29 matters. This schedule was added by the 73rd Amendment Act of 
1992. 
243-G 
Twelfth 
Schedule 
Specifies the powers, authority and responsibilities of Municipalities. It 
has 18 matters. This schedule was added by the 74th Amendment Act of 
1992. 
243-W 
Table 4.4 Sources of the Constitution at a Glance 
 
Sources 
Features Borrowed 
1. 
Government of India 
Act of 1935 
Federal Scheme, Office of Governor, Judiciary, Public Service 
Commissions, Emergency provisions, Advisory Jurisdiction of the 
Supreme Court and administrative details. 

 
 
Sources 
Features Borrowed 
2. 
British Constitution 
Parliamentary government, Rule of Law, legislative procedure, single 
citizenship, cabinet system, prerogative writs, parliamentary privileges 
and bicameralism. 
3. 
US Constitution 
Fundamental rights, independence of judiciary, judicial review, 
impeachment of the president, removal of Supreme Court and high 
court judges and post of vice-president. 
4. 
Irish Constitution 
Directive Principles of State Policy, nomination of members to Rajya 
Sabha and method of election of president. 
5. 
Canadian Constitution Federation with a strong Centre, vesting of residuary powers in the 
Centre and appointment of state governors by the Centre. 
6. 
Australian 
Constitution 
Concurrent List, freedom of trade, commerce and inter-course, and joint 
sitting of the two Houses of Parliament. 
7. 
Weimar Constitution 
of Germany 
Emergency provisions relating to suspension of Fundamental Rights. 
8. 
Soviet Constitution 
(USSR, now Russia) 
Fundamental duties and the ideal of justice (social, economic and 
political) in the Preamble. 
9. 
French Constitution 
Republic and the ideals of liberty, equality and fraternity in the 
Preamble. 
10. South African 
Constitution 
Procedure for amendment of the Constitution and election of members 
of Rajya Sabha. 
11. Japanese Constitution Procedure established by Law. 
 
1Kesavananda Bharati vs. State of Kerala, (1973) 

 
2The American Constitution originally consisted of only 7 Articles, the Australian 128, the Chinese 138, 
and the Canadian 147. 
3About 250 provisions of the 1935 Act have been included in the Constitution. 
4Constituent Assembly Debates, Volume VII, pp. 35–38. 
5P.M. Bakshi, The Constitution of India, Universal, Fifth Edition, 2002, p. 4. 
6Brij Kishore Sharma, Introduction to the Constitution of India, Seventh Edition, 2015, PHI Learning 
Private Limited, p. 42. 
7Westminster is a place in London where the British Parliament is located. It is often used as a symbol/ 
synonym of the British Parliament. 
8Minerva Mills vs. Union of India, (1980). 
9The 1909, 1919, and 1935 Acts provided for communal representation. 
10Even in the western countries, the right to vote was extended only gradually. For example, USA gave 
franchise to women in 1920, Britain in 1928, USSR (now Russia) in 1936, France in 1945, Italy in 1948 and 
Switzerland in 1971. 
11At present, there are three All-India services, namely Indian Administrative Service (IAS), Indian Police 
Service (IPS) and Indian Forest Service (IFoS). In 1947, Indian Civil Service (ICS) was replaced by IAS and 
the Indian Police (IP) was replaced by IPS and were recognised by the Constitution as All-India Services. 
In 1963, IFoS was created and it came into existence in 1966. 
12The 44th Amendment Act (1978) has replaced the original term ‘internal disturbance’ by the new term 
‘armed rebellion’. 
13Constituent Assembly Debates, Volume VII, pp. 35–38. 
14Ibid. 
15Constituent Assembly Debates, Volume XI, p. 616. 
16Constituent Assembly Debates, Volume VII, p. 242. 
17Constituent Assembly Debates, Volume XI, p. 613. 
18Constituent Assembly Debates, Volume XI, p. 617. 
19Constituent Assembly Debates, Volume VII, p. 387. 
20Ivor Jennings, Some Characteristics of the Indian Constitution, Oxford University Press, Madras, 1953, 
pp. 9–16. 
21Constituent Assembly Debates, Volume VII, p. 1042. 
22Constituent Assembly Debates, Volume VIII, p. 127. 
23Constituent Assembly Debates, Volume VII, p. 293. 

 
24Constituent Assembly Debates, Volume IX, p. 613. 
25Though the last entry is numbered 284, the actual total number is 282. This is because, three entries 
(87,92 and 130) have been deleted and one entry is numbered as 257-A. 
26This is the date on which the Supreme Court delivered its judgement in the Kesavananda Bharati vs. 
State of Kerala case. This case is popularly known as the Fundamental Rights case.