 
CHAPTER 19 Vice-President 
The Vice-President occupies the second highest office in the country. He/she is accorded a rank next to 
the President in the official warrant of precedence. This office is modelled on the lines of the American 
Vice-President. 
  
ELECTION 
The Vice-President, like the President, is elected not directly by the people but by the method of indirect 
election. He/she is elected by the members of an electoral college consisting of the members of both 
Houses of Parliament.1 Thus, this electoral college is different from the electoral college for the election 
of the President in the following two respects: 
1. It consists of both elected and nominated members of the Parliament (in the case of president, 
only elected members). 
2. It does not include the members of the state legislative assemblies (in the case of President, the 
elected members of the state legislative assemblies are included). Explaining the reason for this 
difference, Dr. B.R. Ambedkar observed:2 
“The President is the head of the State and his/her power extends both to the administration by the 
Centre as well as to the states. Consequently, it is necessary that in his/her election, not only members 
of Parliament should play their part, but the members of the state legislatures should have a voice. But, 
when we come to the Vice-President, his/her normal functions are to preside over the council of states. 
It is only on a rare occasion, and that too for a temporary period, that he/she may be called upon to 
assume the duties of the president. That being so, it does not seem necessary that the members of the 
state legislatures should also be invited to take part in the election of the Vice-President”. 
But, the manner of election is same in both the cases. Thus, the Vice-President’s election, like that of the 
President’s election, is held in accordance with the system of proportional representation by means of 
the single transferable vote and the voting is by secret ballot. 
All doubts and disputes in connection with election of the Vice-President are inquired into and decided 
by the Supreme Court whose decision is final. The election of a person as Vice-President cannot be 
challenged on the ground that the electoral college was incomplete (i.e., existence of any vacancy among 
the members of electoral college). If the election of a person as Vice-President is declared void by the 
Supreme Court, acts done by him/her before the date of such declaration of the Supreme Court are not 
invalidated (i.e., they continue to remain in force). 
The various vice-presidential elections held so far are summarised in Table 19.1. 
Table 19.1 Elections of the Vice-Presidents (1952–till now) 

 
Sl. 
No. 
Election 
Year 
Victorious Candidate 
No. of Votes 
secured 
Runner-up 
Candidate 
No. of Votes 
secured 
1. 
Dr. S. Radhakrishnan 
— 
Unopposed 
— 
2. 
Dr. S. Radhakrishnan 
— 
Unopposed 
— 
3. 
Dr. Zakir Husain 
N. Samant Singh 
4. 
V.V. Giri 
Prof. Habib 
5. 
G.S. Pathak 
H.V. Kamath 
6. 
B.D. Jatti 
N.E. Horo 
7. 
M. Hidayatullah 
— 
Unopposed 
— 
8. 
R. Venkataraman 
B.C. Kambley 
9. 
Dr. Shankar Dayal 
Sharma 
— 
Unopposed 
— 
10. 
K.R. Narayanan 
Kaka Joginder 
Singh 
11. 
Krishna Kant 
Surjeet Singh 
Barnala 
12. 
B.S. Shekhawat 
Shushil Kumar 
Shinde 
13. 
Mohd. Hamid Ansari 
Najma Heptullah 
14. 
Mohd. Hamid Ansari 
Jaswant Singh 

 
Sl. 
No. 
Election 
Year 
Victorious Candidate 
No. of Votes 
secured 
Runner-up 
Candidate 
No. of Votes 
secured 
15. 
Venkaiah Naidu 
Gopal Krishna 
Gandhi 
16. 
Jagdeep Dhankar 
Margaret Alva 
QUALIFICATIONS, OATH AND CONDITIONS 
 Qualifications 
To be eligible for election as Vice-President, a person should fulfil the following qualifications: 
1. He/she should be a citizen of India. 
2. He/she should have completed 35 years of age. 
3. He/she should be qualified for election as a member of the Rajya Sabha. 
4. He/she should not hold any office of profit under the Union government or any state 
government or any local authority or any other public authority. 
But, a sitting President or Vice-President of the Union, the governor of any state and a minister for the 
Union or any state is not deemed to hold any office of profit and hence qualified for being a candidate 
for Vice-President. 
Further, the nomination of a candidate for election to the office of Vice-President must be subscribed by 
at least 20 electors as proposers and 20 electors as seconders. Every candidate has to make a security 
deposit of ₹15,000 in the Reserve Bank of India.3 
 Oath or Affirmation 
Before entering upon his/her office, the Vice-President has to make and subscribe to an oath or 
affirmation. In his/her oath, the Vice-President swears: 
1. To bear true faith and allegiance to the Constitution of India; and 
2. To faithfully discharge the duties of his/her office. 
The oath of office to the Vice-President is administered by the President or some person appointed in 
that behalf by him/her. 
 Conditions of Office 
The Constitution lays down the following two conditions of the Vice-President’s office: 

 
1. He/she should not be a member of either House of Parliament or a House of the state 
legislature. If any such person is elected as the Vice-President, he/she is deemed to have vacated 
the seat in that House on the date on which he/she enters upon the office as Vice-President. 
2. He/she should not hold any other office of profit. 
TERM AND VACANCY 
 Term of Office 
The Vice-President holds office for a term of five years from the date on which he/she enters upon 
his/her office. However, he/she can resign from his/her office at any time by addressing the resignation 
letter to the President. He/she can also be removed from the office before completion of his/her term. A 
formal impeachment is not required for his/her removal. He/she can be removed by a resolution passed 
by a majority of all the then members of the Rajya Sabha and agreed to by the Lok Sabha. This means 
that this resolution should be passed in the Rajya Sabha by an effective majority and in the Lok Sabha by 
a simple majority. Further, this resolution can be introduced only in the Rajya Sabha and not in the Lok 
Sabha. But, no such resolution can be moved unless at least 14 days’ advance notice has been given. 
Notably, no ground has been mentioned in the Constitution for his/her removal. 
The Vice-President can hold office beyond his/her term of five years until his/her successor assumes 
charge. He/she is also eligible for re-election to that office. He/she may be elected for any number of 
terms.4 
 Vacancy in Office 
A vacancy in the Vice-President’s office can occur in any of the following ways: 
1. On the expiry of his/her tenure of five years 
2. By his/her resignation 
3. On his/her removal 
4. By his/her death5 
5. Otherwise, for example, when he/she becomes disqualified to hold office or when his/her 
election is declared void. 
When the vacancy is going to be caused by the expiration of the term of the sitting vice-president, an 
election to fill the vacancy must be held before the expiration of the term. 
If the office falls vacant by resignation, removal, death or otherwise, then election to fill the vacancy 
should be held as soon as possible after the occurrence of the vacancy. The newly-elected vice-president 
remains in office for a full term of five years from the date he/she assumes charge of his/her office. 
POWERS AND FUNCTIONS 
The functions of the Vice-President are two-fold: 

 
1. He/she acts as the ex-officio Chairman of Rajya Sabha. In this capacity, his/her powers and 
functions are similar to those of the Speaker of Lok Sabha. In this respect, he/she resembles the 
American vice-president, who also acts as the Chairman of the Senate—the Upper House of the 
American legislature. 
2. He/she acts as President when a vacancy occurs in the office of the President due to his/her 
resignation, impeachment, death or otherwise.6 He/she can act as President only for a maximum 
period of six months within which a new President has to be elected. Further, when the sitting 
President is unable to discharge his/her functions due to absence, illness or any other cause, the 
Vice-President discharges his/her functions until the President resumes his/her office.7 
While acting as President or discharging the functions of President, the Vice-President does not perform 
the duties of the office of the chairman of Rajya Sabha. During this period, those duties are performed 
by the Deputy Chairman of Rajya Sabha. 
The Constitution has not fixed any emoluments for the Vice-President in that capacity. He/she draws 
his/her regular salary in his/her capacity as the ex-officio Chairman of the Rajya Sabha. In 2018, the 
Parliament increased the salary of the Chairman of the Rajya Sabha from ₹1.25 lakh to ₹4 lakh per 
month8. Earlier in 2008, the pension of the retired Vice-President was increased from ₹20,000 per month 
to 50% of his/her salary per month9. In addition, he/she is entitled to daily allowance, free furnished 
residence, medical, travel and other facilities. 
During any period when the Vice-President acts as President or discharges the functions of the 
President, he/she is not entitled to the salary or allowance payable to the Chairman of Rajya Sabha, but 
the salary and allowance of the President. 
INDIAN AND AMERICAN VICEPRESIDENTS COMPARED 
Though the office of the Indian Vice- President is modelled on the lines of the American Vice-President, 
there is a difference. The American Vice-President succeeds to the presidency when it falls vacant, and 
remains President for the unexpired term of his/her predecessor. The Indian Vice-President, on the other 
hand, does not assume the office of the President when it falls vacant for the unexpired term. He/she 
merely serves as an acting President until the new President assumes charge. 
It is evident that the Constitution has not assigned any significant function to the Vice-President in that 
capacity. Hence, some scholars call him/her ‘His Superfluous Highness’. This office was created with a 
view to maintain the political continuity of the Indian State. 
Table 19.2 Articles Related to Vice-President at a Glance 
Article 
No. 
Subject-matter 
63. 
The Vice-President of India 
64. 
The Vice-President to be ex-officio Chairman of the Council of States 

 
Article 
No. 
Subject-matter 
65. 
The Vice-President to act as President or to discharge his/her functions during casual 
vacancies in the office, or during the absence, of President 
66. 
Election of Vice-President 
67. 
Term of office of Vice-President 
68. 
Time of holding election to fill vacancy in the office of Vice-President and the term of office 
of person elected to fill casual vacancy 
69. 
Oath or affirmation by the Vice-President 
70. 
Discharge of President’s functions in other contingencies 
71. 
Matters relating to, or connected with, the election of Vice-President 
1The original Constitution provided that the Vice-President would be elected by the two Houses of 
Parliament assembled at a joint meeting. This cumbersome procedure was done away by the 11th 
Constitutional Amendment Act of 1961. 
2Constituent Assembly Debates, Volume VII, p. 1001. 
3Presidential and Vice-Presidential Elections Act, 1952 as amended in 1997. 
4Dr. S. Radhakrishnan was elected for a second term. 
5Krishna Kant was the first Vice-President to die in office. 
6When two Presidents, Dr. Zakir Husain and Fakruddin Ali Ahmed, died in office, the then respective 
Vice-Presidents, V.V. Giri and B.D. Jatti acted as President. 
7The Vice-President, Dr. S. Radhakrishnan discharged the functions of the President in June 1960, when 
the then President Dr. Rajendra Prasad was on a 15-day tour to the USSR and again in July 1961, when 
he/she (Dr.  Rajendra Prasad) was very ill. 
8Vide the Finance Act, 2018, with effect from 1st January, 2016. This Act amended the Salaries and 
Allowances of Officers of Parliament Act, 1953. 
9The Vice-President’s Pension (Amendment) Act, 2008. This Act amended the Vice-President’s Pension 
Act, 1997. 

 
 
 
