CHAPTER
NATURAL VEGETATION 5)
He: you ever been toa forest for a picnic? Tropical Evergreen and
You might have surely gone toaparkif Semi Evergreen Forests
ou live in a city or to a mango, guava .
or coconut orchard, if you live in avillage How These forests are found in the western slope
do you differentiate between the natural of the Western Ghats, hills of the northeastern
vegetation and the planted vegetation? The same region and the Andaman and Nicobar Islands.
variety may be found growing wild in the forest. They are found in warm and humid areas with
under natural conditions and the same tree 2 annual precipitation of over 200 cm and
may be the planted one in your garden under + =™ean annual temperature above 22°C.
human supervision. Tropical evergreen forests are well stratified,
Natural vegetation refers to a plant with layers closer to the ground and are
community that has been left undisturbed over covered with shrubs and creepers, with short
along time, so as to allow its individual species _ structured trees followed by tall variety of trees.
to adjust themselves to climate and soil In these forests, trees reach great heights up
conditions as fully as possible. to 60 m or above. There is no definite time for
India is a land of great variety of natural _ trees to shed their leaves, flowering and
vegetation. Himalayan heights are marked with —_ fruition. As such these forests appear green
temperate vegetation; the Western Ghats and all the year round. Species found in these
the Andaman Nicobar Islands have tropical forests include rosewood, mahogony, aini,
rain forests, the deltaic regions have tropical _ ebony, etc.
forests and mangroves; the desert and semi The semi evergreen forests are found in the
desert areas of Rajasthan are known for cactii, _ less rainy parts of these regions. Such forests
a wide variety of bushes and thorny vegetation. have a mixture of evergreen and moist
Depending upon the variations in the climate —_ deciduous trees. The undergrowing climbers
and the soil, the vegetation of India changes _ provide an evergreen character to these forests.
from one region to another. Main species are white cedar, hollock and kail.
On the basis of certain common features
such as predominant vegetation type and
climatic regions, Indian forests can be divided . > .
into the following groups: ., ie. ee a ae
$ >
Types OF FORESTS ae eee ms
(i) Tropical Evergreen and Semi t be ¢; a i y ‘
Evergreen forests Wigton ae Pi wy. : BR
(ii) Tropical Deciduous forests os ie + Te ah !
(iii) Tropical Thorn forests .
(iv) Montane forests » 2 .
(v) Littoral and Swamp forests. Figure 5.1 : Evergreen Forest



58 INDIA : PHYSICAL ENVIRONMENT
68°E 72° 76° 80° 84° B8° 92° 96°E
aa,
36°N fe ON
Be - INDIA 36°N
SU eth
RPG NATURAL VEGETATION
(eee ae
PAKISTAN (ne
37° Mud
tee tate Ape o
eB 32
& od
a et
- mo Ny
j ae ee CHINA
- oe ~. (TIBET) LH
2” M4 Nay phe
ae e5 ere Oe —~
fo ery < Po BHUTAN "Yad
u Aw neadl
. pon rus ,
we IT D IT A & BANGLADESH, 24°
? OP ornnencecnssncenstennneetteecesgaseetnnsasertsessvieennnisssssaasaneaesetannaneent cee cee Mga jropie of Cancer
fi yo
wl MYANMAR
20° Xn a0°
ARABIAN BAY OF se
SEA BENGAL
TYPES OF VEGETATION
16° ,
iz Littoral and Swamp Forest bhtho
f Montane Forest °
LC] Tropical Thorn Forest 4
[J] Tropical Deciduous Forests} sf *
12° Tropical Evergreen and ° o
oe _ Semi Evergreen Forests Ye 12!
e .
e
“. - +g
. . ANDAMAN & NICOBAR ISLANDS
LAKSHADWEEP “as (INDIA)
en (INDIA) . o 200 400 600 km 5
. — et irs » 4
f * | B°N
INDIAN , OCEAN a
IDE 76° ga® gR° 92°E 9
Figure 5.2 : Natural Vegetation



TT
NATURAL VEGETATION 59

The British were aware of the economic __ the plains of Uttar Pradesh and Bihar. In the
value of the forests in India, hence, large scale _ higher rainfall regions of the Peninsular plateau
exploitation of these forests was started. The —_and the northern Indian plain, these forests
structure of forests was also changed. The oak _ have a parkland landscape with open stretches
forests in Garhwal and Kumaon were replaced _in which teak and other trees interspersed with
by pine (chirs) which was needed to lay railway patches of grass are common. As the dry
lines. Forests were also cleared for introducing season begins, the trees shed their leaves
plantations of tea, rubber and coffee. The completely and the forest appears like a vast
British also used timber for construction grassland with naked trees all around. Tendu,
activities as it acts as an insulator ofheat.The —_palas, amaltas, bel, khair, axlewood, etc. are
protectional use of forests was, thus, replaced =the common trees of these forests. In the
by commercial use. western and southern part of Rajasthan,

vegetation cover is very scanty due to low
Tropical Deciduous Forests rainfall and overgrazing.
These are the most widespread forests in India. :
They are also called the monsoon forests. They Tropical Thorn Forests
spread over regions which receive rainfall Tropical thorn forests occur in the areas which
between 70-200 cm. On the basis of the receive rainfall less than 50 cm. These consist
availability of water, these forests are further —_ of a variety of grasses and shrubs. It includes
divided into moist and dry deciduous. semi-arid areas of south west Punjab,
Haryana, Rajasthan, Gujarat, Madhya Pradesh

a aS a roe a +S UE: and Uttar Pradesh. In these forests, plants
er & eas aes : Por eae wee 2g remain leafless for most part of the year and
en, - eee ett - give an expression of scrub vegetation.
ray ea ~ es a3 =e ie ee Important species found are babool, ber, and
: Sess ns are 3 wild date palm, Khair, neem, Ichejri, palas, etc.

ie eee mee We Tussocky grass grows upto a height of 2 mas
aint Soca Fe - aes the under growth.
Tn oe ee

: a . B gk .
PSE. so Se Ae ,
iP F tae} a
Figure 5.3 : Deciduous Forests Fx he Sy

The Moist deciduous forests are more
pronounced in the regions which record rainfall
between 100-200 cm. These forests are found
in the northeastern states along the foothills of
Himalayas, eastern slopes of the Western Ghats
and Orissa. Teak, sal, shisham, hurra, mahua, Figure 5.4 : Tropical Thorn Forests
ama, semul, kusum, and sandalwood etc. are —_ywontane Forests
the main species of these forests.

Dry deciduous forest covers vast areas of In mountainous areas, the decrease in
the country, where rainfall ranges between temperature with increasing altitude leads to
70 -100 cm. On the wetter margins, ithasa a corresponding change in natural vegetation.
transition to the moist deciduous, whileonthe | Mountain forests can be classified into two
drier margins to thorn forests. These forests _ types, the northern mountain forests and the
are found in rainier areas of the Peninsulaand — southern mountain forests.

LL



TT
60 INDIA : PHYSICAL ENVIRONMENT
The Himalayan ranges show a succession The southern mountain forests include
of vegetation from the tropical to the tundra, the forests found in three distinct areas of
which change in with the altitude. Deciduous —_ Peninsular India viz; the Western Ghats, the
forests are found in the foothills of the Vindhyas and the Nilgiris. As they are closer
Himalayas. It is succeeded by the wet _ to the tropics, and only 1,500 m above the
temperate type of forests between an altitude sea level, vegetation is temperate in the higher
of 1,000-2,000 m. In the higher hill ranges of regions, and subtropical on the lower regions
northeastern India, hilly areas of West Bengal _ of the Western Ghats, especially in Kerala,
and Uttaranchal, evergreen broad leaf trees Tamil Nadu and Karnataka. The temperate
such as oak and chestnut are predominant. forests are called Sholas in the Nilgiris,
Between 1,500-1,750 m, pine forests arealso —- Anaimalai and Palani hills. Some of the other
well-developed in this zone, with Chir Pine as __ trees of this forest of economic significance
avery useful commercial tree. Deodar, ahighly include, magnolia, laurel, cinchona and
valued endemic species grows mainly inthe wattle. Such forests are also found in the
western part of the Himalayan range. Deodar = Satpura and the Maikal ranges.
is a durable wood mainly used in construction
activity. Similarly, the chinarand the walnut, Littoral and Swamp Forests
which sustain the famous Kashmir {dia has a rich variety of wetland habitats.
handicrafts, belong to this zone. Bluepineand = anoyt 70 per cent of this comprises areas
spruce appear at altitudes of 2,225-3,048 m. under paddy cultivation. The total area of wet
At many places in this zone, temperate —janq is 3.9 million hectares. Two sites —
grasslands are also found. But in the higher — Chitika Lake (Orissa) and Keoladeo National
reaches there is a transition to Alpine forests park (Bharatpur) are protected as water-fowl
and pastures. Silver firs, junipers, pines, birch habitats under the Convention of Wetlands of
and rhododendrons, etc. occur between International Importance (Ramsar Convention).
3,000-4,000 m. However, these pastures are
used extensively for transhumance by tribes An international convention is an
like the Gujjars, the Bakarwals, the Bhotiyas agreement among member states of
and the Gaddis. The southern slopes of the the United Nations.
Himalayas carry a thicker vegetation cover
because of relatively higher precipitation than The country’s wetlands have been grouped
the drier north-facing slopes. At higher into eight categories, viz. (i) the reservoirs of the
altitudes, mosses and lichens form part ofthe Deccan Plateau in the south together with the
tundra vegetation. lagoons and other wetlands of the southern
west coast; (ii) the vast saline expanses of
Rajasthan, Gujarat and the Gulf of Kachchh;
ry a . (iii) freshwater lakes and reservoirs from Gujarat
5 oe a eastwards through Rajasthan (Keoladeo
Ne oo ae : National Park) and Madhya Pradesh; (iv) the
/ ; delta wetlands and lagoons of India’s east coast
y ’ fe ee ; (Chilika Lake); (v) the freshwater marshes of the
; fs in Gangetic Plain; (vi) the floodplains of the
Brahmaputra; the marshes and swamps in the
eae ee hills of northeast India and the Himalayan
Lys S. aa S Tas foothills; (vii) the lakes and rivers of the montane
a0 Se = ee region of Kashmir and Ladakh; and (viii) the
= Re a seh ee ; mangrove forest and other wetlands of the island
Peas = = ancy i arcs of the Andaman and Nicobar Islands.
2 Se) eee Mangroves grow along the coasts in the salt
Figure 5.5 : Montane Forests marshes, tidal creeks, mud flats and estuaries.
an



TT
NATURAL VEGETATION 61
They consist ofa number ofsalt-tolerant species Most of the forests in Punjab and Haryana have
of plants. Crisscrossed by creeks of stagnant been cleared for cultivation. States with 10-20
water and tidal flows, these forests give shelter per cent forest area are Tamil Nadu and West
to a wide variety of birds. Bengal. In Peninsular India, excluding Tamil
ses SSRN ER Nadu, Dadra and Nagar Haveli and Goa, the area
Seg Ss! Paks ERR Oe SN under forest cover is 20-30 per cent. The
{ Ramee PES eRe feet = RAE peat a2 northeastern states have more than 30 per cent
Set ey NR A Pee, gy @ of the land under forest. Hilly topography and
$C en ae OY ee 0 eee 8 1 . ly topography
ex Bags anes ASE yo ‘8 ape 5 heavy rainfall are good for forest growth.
ae cone Rees oe a we a There is a lot of variation in actual forest cover,
iS ee te Page, GS ww which ranges from 9.56 per cent in Jammu and
OS Saath Ai ae CON Be es Si Kashmir to 84.01 per cent in Andaman and
ee at Ae aS / | ”j Nicobar Islands. From the table showing the
EA tres a ; Py ea ny Wii ss di { Lae distribution of forests in India (Appendix IV), it is
ae eas LAAT. BN SE \ e% ~~ clear that there are 15 states where the forest cover
AT ANN REN “dN MK *Y Ne) "  ismore than one-third of the total area, which is
ee OG) (UAE) AON AG NI My the basic requirement for maintaining the
Figure 5.6 : Mangrove Forests ecological balance.
On the basis of the percentage of the actual
In India, the mangrove forests spread over _ forest cover, the states have been grouped into
6,740 sq. km which is 7 per cent of the world’s _ four regions:
mangrove forests. They are highly developed in
the Andaman and Nicobar Islands and the The Region Percentage
Sunderbans of West Bengal. Other areas of Cover of the
significance are the Mahanadi, the Godavari and Forest
the Krishna deltas. These forests too, are being () The region of high concentration > 40
encroached upon, and hence, need conservation. (ii) The region of medium concentration | 20-40
Forest Cover In Inpia (ii) The region of low concentration 10-20
(iv) The region of very low concentration] < 10
According to state records, the forest area
covers 23.28 percent of the totalland areaof Taking the data from Appendix IV, list the states under
the country. It is important to note that the the four regins of forest cover
forest area and the actual forest cover are not
the same. The forest area is the area notified Forest ConseRvATION
and recorded as the forest land irrespective of Forests have an intricate interrelationship with
the existence of trees, while the actual forest life and environment. These provide numerous
cover is the area occupied by forests with direct and indirect advantages to our economy
canopy. The formeris based on the records of — d soci H ‘ati {forest is of
the State Revenue Department, while the latter an society. ence, conservation ov forest is ©
. A . vital importance to the survival and prosperity
is based on aerial photographs and satellite f humankind. A di the G t
imageries. In 2001, the actual forest cover was or num nd. Accordingly, fe Sovernmen
only 20.55 per cent. Of the forest cover, the of India proposed to have a nation-wide forest
share of dense and open forests was 12.60 per conservation policy, and adopted a forest
cent and 7.87 per cent rerspectively. policy in 1952, which was further modified in
Both forest area and forest cover vary from 1988. According to the new forest policy, the
state to state. Lakshadweep has zero per cent Government will emphasise sustainable forest
forest area: Andaman and Nicobar Islands have = ™anagement in order to conserve and expand
86.93 per cent. Most of the states withlessthan _ forest reserve on the one hand, and to meet
10 per cent of the forest arealiein thenorthand __ the needs of local people on the other.
northwestern part of the country. These are The forest policy aimed at : (i) bringing 33
Rajasthan, Gujarat, Punjab, Haryana and Delhi. per cent of the geographical areas under forest
an



TT
62 INDIA : PHYSICAL ENVIRONMENT
cover; (ii) maintaining environmental stability Based on the forest conservation policy the
and to restore forests where ecologicalbalance _ following steps were initiated:
was disturbed; (iii) conserving the natural
heritage of the country, its biological diversity Social Forestry
and genetic pool; {iv) checks soil erosion, Social forestry means the management and
extension of the desert lands and reduction of protection of forests and afforestation on barren
floods and droughts; (v) increasing the forest lan ds with the purpose of helping in the
cover through social forestry and afforestation . .
on degraded land: (vi) increasing the environmental, social and rural development.
productivity of forests to make timber, fuel, The National Commission on Agriculture
fodder and food available to rural population (1976) has classified social forestry into three
dependant on forests, and encourage the categories. These are Urban forestry, Rural
substitution of wood; (vii) creating of a massive forestry and Farm forestry. _
peoples movement involving women to Urban forestry pertains to the raising and
encourage planting of trees, stop felling of trees | ™anagement of trees on public and privately
and thus, reduce pressure on the existing forest. owned lands in and around urban centres
such as green belts, parks, roadside avenues,
Forests and Life industrial and commercial green belts, etc.
To a vast number of tribal people, the Rural forestry lays emphasis on promotion
forest is a home, a livelihood, their of agro-forestry and community-forestry.
very existence. It provides them food, Agro-forestry is the raising of trees and
fruits of all kinds, edible leaves, honey, agriculture crops on the same land inclusive
nourishing roots and wild game. It of the waste patches. It combines forestry with
provides them with material to build agriculture, thus, altering the simultancous
pheno Us copa nde tee OmDracu sing production of food, fodder, fuel, timber and
in tribal economy, ie well. roasts fruit. Community forestry involves the raising
they are the source of sustenance and of trees on public or community land such as
TREO Oct ort bo lkcontmcriticomel tne the village pasture and temple land, roadside,
commonly believed that the tribal canal bank, strips along railway lines, and
communities live in harmony with schools etc. Community forestry programme
nature and protect forests. Out of a aims at providing benefits to the community
total of 593 districts 187 (2001) have as a whole. Community forestry provides a
been identified as tribal districts. The means under which the people of landless
tribal districts account for about 59.8 classes can associate themselves in tree-
pruntry whereas the geoseaphical raising and thus, get those benefits which
area of 187 tribal districts forms only otherwise are restricted for landowners.
33.6 per cent of the total geographical
area of the country. It demonstrates Farm Forestry
Coren oo tL Farm forestry is a term applied to the process
SE under which farmers grow trees for
Forest and tribals are very closely commercial and non-commercial purposes on
related. The age-old knowledge of their farm lands.
tribals regarding forestry can be used Forest departments of various states
ee re ae distribute seedlings of trees free of cost to
Te collectors eee oricnne small and medium farmers. Several lands
made growers of minor forest produce such as the margins of agricultural fields,
and encouraged to participate in grasslands and pastures, land around homes
conservation. and cow sheds may be used for raising trees
under non-commercial farm forestry.
an



TT
NATURAL VEGETATION 63
WILDLIFE In 1972, a comprehensive Wildlife Act
. was enacted, which provides the main legal
You would have visited a 200 and may have framework for conservation and protection
seen animals and birds in captivity. Wildlife of wildlife in India. The two main objectives
or india is pre nae spar Cont of all of the Act are; to provide protection to the
known plant and animal species on the earth endangered species listed in the schedule of
are found in India. The main reason for this ‘¢ Act and to provide legal support to the
remarkable diversity of life forms is the great conservation areas of the country classified
diversity of the ecosystem which this country as National parks, sanctuaries and closed
has preserved and supported through the areas. This Act has been comprehensively
ages. Over the years, their habitat hasbeen amended in 1991, making punishments
disturbed by human activities and as a ‘More stringent and has also made provisions
result, their numbers have dwindled _ for the protection of specified plant species
significantly. There are certain species that | and conservation of endangered species of
are at the brink of extinction. wild animals.
Some of the important reasons of the There are 92 National parks and 492
declining of wildlife are as follows: wildlife sanctuaries covering an area of 15.67
. . . million hectares in the country.
industrial t and pt en onoeieat Wildlife conservation has. a very large
a vancemen broug . abou a rap! ambit with unbounded potential for the well-
crease in the exploitation of forest being of humankind. However, this can be
. TeSOUTCES. achieved only when every individual
(ii) More and more lands were cleared for understands its significance and contributes
agriculture, human settlement, roads, his bit.
wee mining, reservoirs, ctc. For the purpose of effective conservation
(iii) Pressure on forests mounted due to of flora and fauna, special steps have been
lopping for fodder and fuelwood and initiated by the Government of India in
removal of small timber by the local collaboration with UNESCO’s ‘Man and
. people. . Biosphere Programme’.
fiv) Grazing by domestic cattle caused an Special schemes like Project Tiger (1973)
adverse effect on wildlife and its habitat. and Project Elephant (1992) have been
™) Hunting was taken up as a sport by launched to conserve these species and their
the elite and hundreds of wild animals . : .
; . ; habitat in a sustainable manner.
were killed m a Single hunt. Now Project Tiger has been implemented since
(vi) commercial Poaching is rampant, 1973. The main objective of the scheme is to
. ensure maintenance of viable population of
It is being felt that conservation of wildlife tigers in India for scientific, aesthetic,
is of great significance to the national as well cultural and ecological values, and to
as the world heritage along with the promotion _ preserve areas of biological importance as
of ecotourism. What steps have been initiated natural heritage for the benefit, education
by the government in this direction? and enjoyment of the people. Initially, the
Project Tiger was launched in nine tiger
Witpuire Conservation IN Inpia reserves, covering an area of 16,339 sq. km,
The protection of wildlife has a long tradition | Which has now increased to 27 tiger reserves,
in India. Many stories of Panchtantra and €Ncompassing 37,761sq. km of tiger habitats
Jungle Books, etc. have stood the test of time distributed in 17 states. The tiger population
relating to the love for wildlife. These havea in the country has registered an increase
profound impact on young minds. from 1,827 in 1972 to 3,642 in 2001-2002.
an



64 INDIA : PHYSICAL ENVIRONMENT
Project Elephant was launched in 1992 BIOSPHERE RESERVES
to assist states having free ranging , Biosphere Reserve is a unique and
population of wild elephants. It was aimed _ representative ecosystem of terrestrial and
at ensuring long-term survival of identified coastal areas which are internationally
viable population of elephants in their — ;ecognised within the framework of UNESCO's
natural habitat. The project is being Man and Biosphere (MAB) Programme. The
implemented in 13 states. Biosphere Reserve aims at achieving the three
Pm, objectives as depicted in Figure 5.8.
i There are 14 Biosphere Reserves in India
(Table 5.1, Figure 5.9). Four Biosphere
Reserves, namely (i) Nilgiri; (ii) Nanda Devi;
_
CONSERVATION DEVELOPMENT
Conservation of Association of
biodiversity and environment with
ecosystem A ir development
——<— >:  --- BIOSPHERE
a aS RESERVE
Figure 5.7 : Elephants in their Natural Habitat zs
Apart from this, some other projects such LOGISTICS
as Crocodile Breeding Project, Project Hangul International network for research and monitoring
and conservation of Himalayan Musk deer have
also been launched by the Government of India. Figure 5.8 : Objectives of a Biosphere Reserve
Table 5.1 : List of Biosphere Reserves
SL Name of the Biosphere Total
No.| Reserve Geographical Location (States)
Area (km?)
1.| * Nilgiri 5,520 Part of Wynad, Nagarhole, Bandipur and Mudumalai,
Nilambur, Silent Valley and Siruvani Hills (Tamil Nadu,
Kerala and Karnataka)
2.| * Nanda Devi 2,236.74 Part of Chamoli, Pithoragarh and Almora districts
(Uttar Pradesh) and part of Garo Hills (Meghalaya)
3. Nokrek 820 Part of Garo Hills (Meghalaya)
4. Manas 2,837 Part of Kokrajhar, Bongaigaon, Barpeta, Nalbari, Kamrup
and Darrang districts (Assam)
5. | *Sunderbans 9,630 Part of delta of Ganges and Brahmaputra river system (West
Bengal)
6. | * Gulf of Mannar 10,500 Indian part of Gulf of Mannar between India and Sri Lanka
(Tamil Nadu)
7. Great Nicobar 885 Southernmost islands of the Andaman and Nicobar
(A & N Islands)
8. Similipal 4,374 Part of Mayurbhanj district (Orissa)
9. Dibru-Saikhowa 765 Part of Dibrugarh and Tinsukia districts (Assam)
10. Dihang Dibang 5,111.5 Part of Siang and Debang valley in Arunachal Pradesh
11.| | Kanchenjunga 2,619.92 Parts of North and West Sikkim
12.|  Pachmari 4,926.28 Parts of Betul, Hoshangabad and Chindwara districts of
Madhya Pradesh
13. Agasthyamalai 1,701 Agasthyamalai Hills in Kerala
14.|  Achanakmar- Amarkantak 3,835.51 Parts of Anupur and Dindori district of MP and parts of
Bilaspur district of Chhattisgarh
* have been recognised by the UNESCO on World Network of Biosphere Reserves
Source : Annual Report (2004-05), Ministry of Environment and Forests, Government of India



NATURAL VEGETATION 65
68°E 72° 76° 80° 84° 88° 92° 96°E
36°N fren,
C ‘, _. INDIA 36°N
b 2 4
Lr P BIOSPHERE RESERVE
i a
‘ . 4
32° , co .
PAKISTAN ‘S wr 0
C 5 32
$ “~
, “\, Nanda Devi CHINA
j oA, (TIBET) Dihang Dibang _
7 ? ~. “LA
28° - % vt : é ~
. a ~~ . rr .
pret V © 2 usencheniutGa_-2._. BipgsSaiknowa
( Stan. oP ¢ BHUTAN .y™
? Sa VS et r
\ Ne Sa, Ss Manas ;
\ fe Nokrek
nts Py Na, i
ont N D I A BANGLADESH J r °
Bercrcceesseen, . r J 24
i | A {1°
ds Pachmarhi @ e Similipal Do ly
Achanakmar- e al MYANMAR
o Amarkantak Sunderbans
20' : 6
xt 20'
ARABIAN BAY OF
SEA BENGAL
16° hes )
°
-
12°
ee rr
° e Nilgiri °
fe ° se
“oe Agasthyamalai ANDAMAN & NICOBAR ISLANDS
LAKSHADWEEP e a (INDIA)
(INDIA) 2% °,
8°N e Gulf &f Marnar 0 200 400 600 km 9
—= 9 8°N
INDIAN , OCEAN °%
72°E 76° 84° 88° Great Nicobar@
Figure 5.9 : India : Biosphere Reserves



TT
66 INDIA : PHYSICAL ENVIRONMENT
(iii) Sunderbans; and (iv) Gulf of Mannar have weed and orchids like latifolie and
been recognised by the UNESCO on World — rhododendron. The biosphere reserve has a
Network of Biosphere Reserves. rich fauna, for example the snow leopard,
black bear, brown bear, musk deer, snow-
Nilgiri Biosphere Reserve cock, golden eagle and black eagle.
oe . Major threats to the ecosystem are the
The Nilgiri Biosphere Reserve (NBR), the first collection of endangered plants for medicinal
of the fourteen biosphere reserves of India, was use, forest fires and poaching.
established in September 1986. It embraces
the sanctuary complex of Wyanad, Nagarhole, Sunderbans Biosphere Reserve
Bandipur and Mudumalai, the entire forested
hill slopes of Nilambur, the Upper Nilgiri It is located in the swampy delta of the river
plateau, Silent Valley and the Siruvani hills. | Ganga in West Bengal. It extends over a vast
The total area of the biosphere reserve is area of 9,630 sq. km and consists of mangrove
around 5,520 sq. km. forests, swamps and forested islands.
The Nilgiri Biosphere Reserve possesses Sunderbans is the home of nearly 200 Royal
different habitat types, unspoilt areas of | Bengal tigers.
natural vegetation types with several dry The tangled mass of roots of mangrove
scrubs, dry and moist deciduous, semi- trees provide safe homes for a large number
evergreen and wet evergreen forests, evergreen _ of species, from fish to shrimp. More than 170
sholas, grasslands and swamps. It includes birds species are known to inhabit these
the largest known population of two mangrove forests.
endangered animal species, namely the Nilgiri Adapting itself to the saline and fresh water
Tahr and the Lion-tailed macaque. The largest | environment, the tigers at the park are good
south Indian population of elephant, tiger, | swimmers, and they hunt scarce preys such
gaur, sambar and chital as well as a good _ as chital deer, barking deer, wild pig and even
number of endemic and endangered plants are = macaques. In the Sunderbans, the mangrove
also found in this reserve. The habitat of a _ forests are characterised by Heritiera fomes,
number of tribal groups remarkable for their aspecies valued for its timber.
traditional modes of harmonious use of the
environment are also found here. Gulf of Mannar Biosphere Reserve
The topography of the NBR is extremely The Gulf of Mannar Biosphere Reserve covers
varied, ranging from an altitude of 250 m to an area of 105,000 hectares on the southeast
2,650 m. About 80 per cent of the flowering coast of India. It is one of the world’s richest
plants reported from the Western Ghats occur regions from a marine biodiversity perspective.
in the Nilgiri Biosphere Reserve. The biosphere reserve comprises 21 islands
Nanda Devi Biosphere Reserve with estuaries, beaches, forests of the
nearshore environment, sea grasses, coral
The Nanda Devi Biosphere Reserve situated _ reefs, salt marshes and mangroves. Among the
in Uttaranchal includes parts of Chamoli, Gulf’s 3,600 plant and animal species are the
Almora, Pithoragarh and Bageshwar districts. _ globally endangered sea cow (Dugong dugon)
The major forest types of the reserve are and six mangrove species, endemic to
temperate. A few important species are silver | Peninsular India.
—_... EXERCISES —___
1. Choose the right answer from the four alternatives given below.
(i) Sandalwood is an example of:
(a) Evergreen forest (c) Deltaic forest
(b) Deciduous forest (d) Thorny forest
an



TT
NATURAL VEGETATION 67
(ii) Which one of the following was the purpose of Project Tiger?
(a) to kill tigers (c) to protect tigers from illegal hunting
(b) to put tigers in the Zoo (d) to make films on tigers
(iii) In which one of the following states is the Nandadevi Biosphere reserve
situated?
(a) Bihar (c) Uttaranchal
(b) Uttar Pradesh (d) Orissa
(iv) How many of the following numbers of Biosphere reserves are recognised
by the IUCN?
(a) One (c) Three
(b) Two (d) Four
(v) Which one of the following proportion of area of the country was targeted
to be under forest in Forest Policy of India?
(a) 33 (c) 55
(b) 44 (d) 22
2. Answer the following questions in about 30 words.
(i) What is natural vegetation? Under what climatic conditions are tropical
evergreen forests develop?
(ii) What do you understand by social forestry?
(iii) Define Biosphere reserves?
(iv) What is the difference between forest area and forest cover?
3. Answer the following questions in not more than 150 words.
(i) What steps have been taken up to conserve forests?
(ii) How can people's participation be effective in conserving forests and wildlife?
Project /Activity
1. On the outline map of India, mark and label the following.
(i) Areas having Mangrove forests.
(ii) Biosphere reserves of Nanda Devi, Sunderbans, Gulf of Mannar and Nilgiri.
(iii) Mark the location of Forest Survey of India Head Quarter.
2. List the trees, bush and shrub species found around your school. Write
their local names and their uses.
7



