TT
CHAPTER
(6 SoiLs
ave you ever thought about the most are called horizons. ‘Horizon A’ is the topmost
Hore factor which supports trees, | zone, where organic materials have got
grasses, crops and numerous life- incorporated with the mineral matter,
forms over the earth’s surface? Can one grow nutrients and water, which are necessary for
a blade of grass without soil? While some the growth of plants. ‘Horizon B ’ is a transition
plants and organisms which are aquatic in —_ zone between the ‘horizon A’ and ‘horizon C’,
nature can sustain in water, do they not derive and contains matter derived from below as well
nutrients from soil through water? You will as from above. It has some organic matter in
realise that soilis the mostimportantlayerof jt, although the mincral matter is noticeably
the earth’s crust. It is a valuable resource. The —_ weathered. ‘Horizon C’ is composed of the loose
bulk of our food and much of our clothing is _ parent material. This layer is the first stage in
derived from land-based crops that growinthe _ the soil formation process and eventually forms
soil. The soil on which we depend so much for __ the above two layers. This arrangement of layers
our day-to-day needs has evolved over is knownas the soil profile. Underneath these
thousands of years. The various agents of three horizons is the rock which is also known
weathering and gradation have acted upon the _ as the parent rock or the bedrock. Soil, which
parent rock material to produce a thinlayerof jg g complex and varied entity has always
soil. drawn the attention of the scientists. In order
Soil is the mixture of rock debris and _ io ynderstand its importance, it is essential to
organic materials which develop on the earth’s attempt a scientific study of the soil.
surface. The major factors affecting the Classification of the soil is an effort to achieve
formation of soil are relief, parent material, this objective.
climate, vegetation and other life-forms and
time. Besides these, human activities also Gy asgirication oF SOLS
influence it to a large extent. Components of
the soil are mineral particles, humus, waterand ‘India has varied relief features, landforms,
air. The actual amount ofeach of these depend _ climatic realms and vegetation types. These
upon the type of soil. Some soils are deficient | have contributed in the development of various
in one or more of these, while there are some __ types of soils in India.
others that have varied combinations. In ancient times, soils used to be classified
Have you ever dug a pit in the field ofyour into two main groups - Urvara and Usara,
school to plant a tree while celebrating Van- which were fertile and sterile, respectively. In
Mahotsava? Was the pit of uniform layer of soil _—_ the 16th centrury A.D., soils were classified on
or did you notice different colours from the top __ the basis of their inherent characteristics and
to the bottom of the pit? external features such as texture, colour, slope
If we dig a pit on land and look at the soil, | ofland and moisture content in the soil. Based
we find that it consists of three layers which — on texture, main soil types were identified as
an



SOILS 69
sandy, clayey, silty and loam, etc.On the basis about 40 per cent of the total area of the
of colour, they were red, yellow, black, etc. country. They are depositional soils,
Since Independence, scientific surveys of _ transported and deposited by rivers and
soils have been conducted by various agencies. streams. Through a narrow corridor in
Soil Survey of India, established in 1956, made —_— Rajasthan, they extend into the plains of
comprehensive studies of soils in selected areas Gujarat. In the Peninsular region, they are
nie m the pamodar vaNrey- ens National found in deltas of the east coast and in the river
ureau of Soil Survey an e Lan se allevs.
Planning an Institute under the control of the vaeys oe
Indian Council of Agricultural Research (ICAR) pg 9 aaa
did a lot of studies on Indian soils. In their effort Sen
to study soil and to make itcomparable atthe = 7 Scns
international level, the ICAR has classified the = | sips oa Se Se
Indian soils on the basis of their nature and waa aes : a RE Nis RENE Soe toes
character as per the United States Department Sify Rese veces iy oy ae:
of Agriculture (USDA) Soil Taxonomy. te pi 35 BASS Sty es b
ICAR has classified the soils of India into the SEIS Fy ate Ae SR ea re
following order as per the USDA soil taxonomy Peet RS ae ae ee ee GF.
Sl | Order Area Percentage ate ad as Ae e” “4 a
No. (in Thousand iI oe 3 A :
Hectares) Figure 6.1 : Alluvial Soil
@ | Inceptisols | 130372.90 39.74 The alluvial soils vary in nature from sandy
Gi) | Entisols 92131.71 28.08 loam to clay. They are generally rich in potash
(iii) | Alfisols 44448.68 13.55 but poor in phosphorous. In the Upper and
(iv) | Vertisols 27960.00 8.52 Middle Ganga plain, two different types of
( | Aridisols 14069.00 4.28 alluvial soils have developed, viz. Khadar and
. Bhangar. Khadar is the new alluvium and is
(i) | Ultisols 8250.00 2.51 deposited by floods annually, which enriches
(vi) | Mollisols 1320.00 0.40 the soil by depositing fine silts. Bhangar
(viii) | Others 9503.10 2.92 represents a system of older alluvium,
deposited away from the flood plains. Both the
Source : Soils of India, National Bureau of Soil Khadar and Bhangar soils contain calcareous
eurey and Land Use Planning, Publication concretions (Kankars). These soils are more
Number 94 loamy and clayey in the lower and middle
On the basis of genesis, colour, Ganga plain ane the Brabamaputra vaney- ane
composition and location, the soils of India sand content decreases Tom ewes | oO cast.
have been classified into: The colour of the alluvial soils varies from
() Alluvial soils the light grey to ash grey. Its shades depend
(ii) Black soils on the depth of the deposition, the texture of
(ii), Red and Yellow soils the materials, and the time taken for attaining
(iv) Laterite soils maturity. Alluvial soils are intensively
(v) Arid soils cultivated.
(vi) Saline soils .
(vii) Peaty soils Black Soil
(viii) Forest soils. Black soil covers most of the Deccan Plateau
. . which includes parts of Maharashtra, Madhya
Alluvial Soils Pradesh, Gujarat, Andhra Pradesh and some
Alluvial soils are widespread in the northern __ parts of Tamil Nadu. In the upper reaches of
plains and the river valleys. These soils cover _ the Godavari and the Krishna, and the north



70 INDIA : PHYSICAL ENVIRONMENT
68°E 72 76° 80° g4° gg? 92° 96°E
36°N
INDIA 36°N
MAJOR SOIL TYPES
32°
m 4 32°
PAKISTAN oo
nae
PS m CHINA
os ~. (TIBET) tH
2R° , Re ‘ of eee
7.2. eM va, . 2 fNeo)
fT eR fp ea, c Bem 6 my
oo AY ugg en BHUTAN Yeo 7 a
i “a wet Deedee Dee tenn Meme er Te
\ ns STEER GSTS OF
. oo Se sy ETT A oe
Soe ES iz \ NSE ebb hg hg Chanotabest, “ a ae
Qo ee % SS a 22 Po
\: we Cpr rr ree or ENS f Tropic of Cancer
Si eS Ad my Uf
7 ett et tet fb so 1
\ y : MYANMAR
20° cto TS fe a 30°
ARABIAN Mee eee ee - BAY OF se
SEA [ GG BENGAL %
i
Sele eee See ee
16° * 29: iz Forest Soils A j
. bea
SS SS) Alluvial Soils
- e -
Og. Nig Red and Yellow Soils °
eee agere KAA Black Soils i .
1° aa [1] baterte Sols Lye
ee, ied [_] Ard Solts .
«! ” * & * at
> eee q
“  e “fe ANDAMAN & NICOBAR ISLANDS
LAKSHADWEEP . wy a (INDIA)
(INDIA) eh or °
8°N f# ao 200 400 600 km * 4
. ee ——— il ‘2 0)
SRI BN
INDIAN LANKA, OCEAN a,
TPE 76° g4° 88° 92°E 9
Figure 6.2 : Major Soil Types of India



TT
SOILS 71
western part of the Deccan Plateau, the black _‘Laterite Soil
soil x S very deep. These soils are also known as Laterite has been derived from the Latin word
the Regur Soil’ or the ‘Black Cotton Soil’. The ‘Later’ which means brick. The laterite soils
black soils are generally clayey, deep and develop in areas with high temperature and
impermeable. They swell and become sticky high rainfall. These are the result of intense
when wet and shrink when dried. So, during leaching due to tropical rains. With rain, lime
ne dry Beason. these “on seveioe wide cracks. and silica are leached away, and soils rich in
as, Mere occurs a kind 0 self ploug 'N9- ion oxide and aluminium compound are left
Because of this character of slow absorption behind. Humus content of the soil is removed
and loss of moisture, the black soil retains the fast by bacteria that thrives well in high
moisture fora very long time, which helps the temperature. These soils are poor in organic
crops, especially, the rain fed ones, to sustain matter, nitrogen, phosphate and calcium,
even during the dry season. while iron oxide and potash are in excess.
Hence, laterites are not suitable for cultivation;
ee ; ne here “Bay however, application of manures and fertilisers
o> Want me eee Fn hee eS are required for making the soils fertile for
Pe At Fee SS] cultivation.
Ser Peet eae a Rig ea Red laterite soils in Tamil Nadu, Andhra
Pao St ees eee Bite Pradesh and Kerala are more suitable for tree
‘ eee oes pe mage 3 crops like cashewnut.
eeu ae ae a ba Se aa Laterite soils are widely cut as bricks for
i ES nee » __usce in house construction. These soils have
Se ee a “4 ‘mainly developed in the higher areas of the
bo. ae Rae =F _~SCsi Peninsular plateau. The laterite soils are
% a Le commonly found in Karnataka, Kerala, Tamil
Figure 6.3 : Black Soil During Dry Season Nadu, Madhya Pradesh and the hilly areas of
Orissa and Assam.
Chemically, the black soils are rich in lime,
iron, magnesia and alumina. They alsocontain Arid Soils
otash. But they lack in phosphorous,
nitrogen and organic matter. The rote ofthe Arid soils range from red to brown in colour.
soil ranges from deep black to grey. They are generally sandy in structure and
saline in nature. In some areas, the salt content
Red and Yellow Soil is so high that common salt is obtained by
evaporating the saline water. Due to the dry
Red soil develops on crystalline igneous rocks climate, high temperature and accelerated
in areas of low rainfall in the eastern and evaporation, they lack moisture and humus.
southern part of the Deccan Plateau. Along the —_ Nitrogen is insufficient and the phosphate
piedmont zone of the Western Ghat, long stretch
of area is occupied by red loamy soil. Yellow and rm =
red soils are also found in parts of Orissaand == ™ a Cap ST eae
Chattisgarh and in the southern parts of the =| rea. ,
middle Ganga plain. The soil developsareddish | ~~ | Ss a te ~
colour due to a wide diffusion ofironin crystalline | an = Pare ee _
and metamorphic rocks. It looks yellow when it ee ie ee a eter
occurs in a hydrated form. The fine-grained red | jiiyeting te a
and yellow soils are normally fertile, whereas | _ “ a i r pass i
coarse-grained soils found in dry upland areas | => oe a re Saree “
are poor in fertility. They are generally poor in SES SS ea
nitrogen, phosphorous and humus. Figure 6.4 : Arid Soil
LL



TT
72 INDIA : PHYSICAL ENVIRONMENT
content is normal. Lower horizons of the soil soils are normally heavy and black in colour.
are occupied by ‘kankar’ layers because of the At many places, they are alkaline also. It occurs
increasing calcium content downwards. The — widely in the northern part of Bihar, southern
‘Kankar’ layer formation in the bottom horizons _ part of Uttaranchal and the coastal areas of West
restricts the infiltration of water,andassuch Bengal, Orissa and Tamil Nadu.
when irrigation is made available, the soil
moisture is readily available fora sustainable Forest Soils
plant growth. Arid soils are characteristically As the name suggests, forest soils are formed in
developed in western Rajasthan, which exhibit the forest areas where sufficient rainfall is
characteristic arid topography. These soils are available. The soils vary in structure and texture
poor and contain little humus and organic d di - th tain envi t whi
matter. lepending on the moun environment where
they are formed. They are loamy and silty on
Saline Soils valley sides and coarse-grained in the upper
slopes. In the snow-bound areas of the
They are also known as Usarasoils. Saline soils — Himalayas, they experience denudation, and
contain a larger proportion of sodium, are acidic with low humus content. The soils
potassium and magnesium, and thus, theyare _ found in the lower valleys are fertile.
infertile, and do not support any vegetative It is evident from the foregoing discussions
growth. They have more salts, largely because _that soils, their texture, quality and nature are
of dry climate and poor drainage. They occur _ vital for the germination and growth of plant
in arid and semi-arid regions, and in and vegetation including crops. Soils are living
waterlogged and swampy areas. Their systems. Like any other organism, they too
structure ranges from sandy to loamy. They —_ develop and decay, get degraded, respond to
lack in nitrogen and calcium. Saline soils are proper treatment if administered in time. These
more widespread in western Gujarat, deltasof have serious repercussions on other
the eastern coast and in Sunderban areas of components of the system of which they
West Bengal. In the Rann of Kuchchh, the _ themselves are important parts.
Southwest Monsoon brings salt particles and
deposits there as a crust. Seawater intrusions Som DEGRADATION
in the deltas promote the occurrence of saline | .
soils. In the areas of intensive cultivation with |! a broad sense, soil degradation can be
excessive use of irrigation, especially inareas _ 4¢fined as the decline in soil fertility, when the
of green revolution, the fertile alluvial soils are DUtTitional status declines and depth of the soil
becoming saline. Excessive irrigation with dry  €¢S down due to crosion and misuse. Soil
climatic conditions promotes capillary action,  4¢gradation is the main factor leading to the
which results in the deposition of salt on the _“¢pleting soil resource base in India. The degree
top layer of the soil. In such areas, especially of Soil degradation varies from place to place
in Punjab and Haryana, farmers are advised 2¢Cording to the topography, wind velocity and
to add gypsum to solve the problem of salinity | 2mount of the rainfall.
in the soil.
Som Erosion
Peaty Soils The destruction of the soil cover is described as
They are found in the areas of heavy rainfall soil erosion. The soil forming processes and the
and high humidity, where there is a good erosional processes of running water and wind
growth ‘of vegetation. Thus, large quantity of | goon simultaneously. But generally, there is a
dead organic matter accumulates in these balance between these two processes. The rate
areas, and this gives arich humus and organic _ Of removal of fine particles from the surface is
content to the soil. Organic matter in these _ the same as the rate of addition of particles to
soils may go even up to 40-50 per cent. These __ the soil layer.
an



SOILS 73

Sometimes, such a balance is disturbed by Soil erosion is a serious problem for Indian
natural or human factors, leading toa greater _ agriculture and its negative effects are seen in other
rate of removal of soil. Human activities tooare spheres also. Eroded materials are carried down
responsible for soil erosion to a great extent. to rivers and they lower down their carrying
As the human population increases, the capacity, and cause frequent floods and damage
demand on the land also increases. Forest and tg agricultural lands.
other natural vegetation is removed for human Deforestation is one of the major causes of soil
settlement, for cultivation, for grazinganimals _ eyosion. Plants keep soils bound in locks of roots,
and for various other needs. and thus, prevent erosion. They also add humus

Wind and water are powerful agents of soil tg the soil by shedding leaves and twigs. Forests
sind to because oi inelr ability to wonifieat soil have been denuded practically in most parts of
avid anspor it " a. None. In signi ct India but their effect on soil erosion are more in
heavy rainfall and steep slopes, erosion by PY Partsofthe country.

vy rat . P Stopes: . y A fairly large area of arable land in the irrigated
running water is more significant. Water ws . .

A we 4 zones of India is becoming saline because of over-
erosion which is more serious and occurs irrigation. The salt lodged in the lower profiles of
extensively in different parts of India, takes place g a 8 wer P .

a . the soil comes up to the surface and destroys its
mainly in the form of sheet and gully erosion. ae . ae
. fertility. Chemical fertilisers in the absence of
Sheet erosion takes place on level lands after a .
. . . organic manures are also harmful to the soil.
heavy shower and the soil removal is not easily . .
. ate oe Unless the soil gets enough humus, chemicals
noticeable. But it is harmful since it removes the . . sper
. . . harden it and reduce its fertility in the long run.
finer and more fertile top soil. Gully erosion is . . .
. . This problem is common in all the command
common on steep slopes. Gullies deepen with . . .

. . . areas of the river valley projects, which were the
rainfall, cut the agricultural lands into small an .
frasments and make them unfit for cultivation first beneficiaries of the Green Revolution.

g . . u nina “According to estimates, about half of the total land
A region with a large number of deep gullies or we A

5 . . of India is under some degree of degradation.
ravines is called a badland topography. Ravines ‘ ays
. ‘ . . Every year, India loses millions of tonnes of
are widespread, in the Chambal basin. Besides . 4 . .

. . . soil and its nutrients to the agents of its
this, they are also found in Tamil Nadu and West . . .

B . . degradation, which adversely affects our national
engal. The country is losing about 8,000 a ae . eae

: productivity. So, it is imperative to initiate

hectares of land to ravines every year. What types . . . .
. immediate steps to reclaim and conserve soils.
are prone to gully erosion?
Soil Conservation

it eg Ate ee! Mae tN a ae If soil erosion and exhaustion are caused by
Seg Sie oe ntact humans; by corollary, they can also be
rane "Maelecen ee ee ~soprevented by humans. Nature has its own laws
% es 2 hy) a ar te of maintaining balance. Nature offers enough

2, ee ie NE ay . sag opportunities for humans to develop their
Lay ha ta) Pat he lhe ats ote * ; : ;

* Pre re ea Stee Beeps. economy without disturbing the ecological
oe a ae ‘ Rease ui Romie gh balance. Soil conservation is a methodology
WBS E oe Sa sat ‘, i % Bre dy _ to maintain soil fertility, prevent soil erosion
Rens 2 BS me ang cS : ¥ a may mi and exhaustion, and improve the degraded
i it sap rhe a 5 xy SS Bac ‘ an *! condition of the soil.
hie Seen eS vy em Sais WF Soil erosion is essentially aggravated by
tesa Sek: oY AA es $ ~*~) faulty practices. The first step in any rational
RET Pi om a ie ( hag orn da bis os solution is to check open cultivable lands on
big Cn Piece s slopes from farming. Lands with a slope
Figure 6.5 : Soil Erosion gradient of 15 - 25 per cent should not be used



TT
74 INDIA : PHYSICAL ENVIRONMENT
for cultivation. If at all the land is tobe used __ be reduced by constructing a series of check
for agriculture, terraces should carefully be | dams. Special attention should be made to
made. Over-grazing and shifting cultivation in —_ control headward extension of gullies. This can
many parts of India have affected the natural be done by gully plugging, terracing or by
cover of land and given rise to extensive erosion. planting cover vegetation.
It should be regulated and controlled by In arid and semi-arid areas, efforts should
educating villagers about the consequences. be made to protect cultivable lands from
Contour bunding, Contour terracing, encroachment by sand dunes through
regulated forestry, controlled grazing, cover developing shelter belts of trees and
cropping, mixed farming and crop rotation are agro-forestry. Lands not suitable for
some of the remedial measures which are often cultivation should be converted into pastures
adopted to reduce soil erosion. for grazing. Experiments have been made to
_— ove tan — stabilise sand dunes in western Rajasthan by
te Fle ares aaa oe the Central Arid Zone Research Institute
ee and y NO ae (CAZRI).
<a — Shs a — 7 The Central Soil Conservation Board, set up
Se che fe a0 Céby the Government of India, has prepared a
os .— = a SS number of plans for soil conservation in different
oo S .. =a parts of the country. These plans are based on
el dir os the climatic conditions, configuration of land
si me and the social behaviour of people. Even these
—<——— * . ers plans are fragmental in nature. Integrated land
A ae " ‘i porns use planning, therefore, seems to be the best
xs Sod 4 technique for proper soil conservation. Lands
. . . should be classified according to their
Figure 6.6 : Terrace Farming capability; land use maps should be prepared
Efforts should be made to prevent gully and lands should be put to right uses. The final
erosion and control their formation. Finger responsibility for achieving the conservation of
gullies can be eliminated by terracing. In land will rest on the people who operate on it
bigger gullies, the erosive velocity of water may and receive the benefits.
——. EXERCISES —__.
1. Choose the right answer from the four alternatives given below.
(i) Which one of the following is the most widespread and most productive
category of soil?
(a) Alluvial Soil (c) Black Soil
(b) Laterite Soil (d) Forest Soil
(ii) ‘Regur Soil’ is another name for the.
(a) Saline Soil (c) Black Soil
(b) Arid Soil (d) Laterite Soil
(iii) Which one of the following is the main reason for the loss of the top soil
in India?
(a) Wind erosion (c) Excessive leaching
(b) Water erosion (d) None of these
an



SOILS 75
(iv) Arable land in the irrigated zones of India is turning saline due to which
of the following reasons?
(a) Addition of gypsum (c) Over irrigation
(b) Over grazing (d) Use of fertilisers
2. Answer the following questions in about 30 words.
(i) What is soil?
(ii) What are the main factors responsible for the formation of soil?
(iii) Mention the three horizons of a soil profile.
(iv) What is soil degradation?
(v) What is the difference between Khadar and Bhangar?
3. Answer the following questions in not more than 125 words.
(i) What are black soils? Describe their formation and characteristics.
(ii) What is soil conservation? Suggest some measures to conserve soil.
(iii) How do you know that a particular type of soil is fertile or not? Differentiate
between naturally determined fertility and culturally induced fertility.
Project /Activity
1. Collect various samples of soil and prepare a report on the type(s) of soils
found in your region.
2. On an outline map of India, mark the areas coverd by the following soil
categories.
(i) Red soil
(ii) Laterite soil
(iii) Alluvial soil.



