CHAPTER
NATURAL HAZARDS AND DISASTERS 7
‘ou might have read about tsunami or __ the change of seasons, ripening of fruits, while
y seen the images of horror on _ there are others like earthquakes, floods and
television set immediately after it | wars that are considered bad and undesirable.
happened. You may also be aware of the severe
earthquake in Kashmir on both sides of the Observe the ee you live in and
Line of Control (LOC). The damage caused to vince o a ust of changes. wee take
human life and properties during these ee ‘which take a ce olinaaneek
episodes has moved us all. What are these as period of time. Do you know why some
phenomena and how they are caused? How changes are considered good and others
can we save ourselves? These are some bad? Prepare a list of changes, which
questions which come to our minds. This you notice in your daily life and give
chapter will attempt to analyse some of these reasons why some of these are
questions. considered good and others bad.
Change is the law ofnature. It is a continuous
process that goes on uninterruptedly involving In this chapter, we will read about some of
phenomena, big and small, material and non- these changes, which are considered bad and
material that make our physical and socio- have haunted humankind for a long time.
cultural environment. It is a process present Disasters in general and natural disasters
everywhere with variations in terms of in particular, are some such changes that are
magnitude, intensity and scale. Change canbe _ always disliked and feared by humankind.
a gradual or slow process like the evolution of
landforms and organisms and it can be as What is a Disaster?
sudden and swift as volcanic eruptions, “Disaster is an undesirable occurrence
tsunamis, earthquakes and lightening, etc. resulting from forces that are largely
Similarly, it may remain confined to a smaller outside human control, strikes quickly
area occurring within a few seconds like with little or no warning, which causes
hailstorms, tornadoes and dust storms, and it Ce serous SD of nig
: : and property including death and injury
can also have global dimensions such as global to a large number of people, and requires
warming and depletion of the ozone layer. therefore, mobilisation of efforts in excess
Besides these, changes have different of that which are normally provided by
meanings for different people. It depends upon statutory emergency services”.
the perspective one takes while trying to
understand them. From the perspective of For a long time, geographical literature
nature, changes are value-neutral (these are _ viewed disasters as a consequence of natural
neither good nor bad). But from the human _ forces; and human beings were treated as
perspective, these are value-loaded. There are innocent and helpless victims in front of the
some changes that are desirable and good like —_— mighty forces of nature. But natural forces are



TT
78 INDIA : PHYSICAL ENVIRONMENT
not the only causes of disasters. Disasters are features in the Himalayas or extreme climatic
also caused by some human activities. There | conditions in deserts or glaciated areas.
are some activities carried by human beings As compared to natural hazards, natural
that are directly responsible for disasters. disasters are relatively sudden and cause
Bhopal Gas tragedy, Chernobyl nuclear disaster, large scale, widespread death, loss of
wars, release of CFCs (Chlorofluorocarbons) and = property and disturbance to social systems
increase of green house gases, environmental —_ and life over which people have a little or no
pollutions like noise, air, water and soil are some control. Thus, any event can be classed as
of the disasters which are caused directly by disaster when the magnitude of destruction
human actions. There are some other activities | and damage caused by it is very high.
of human beings that accelerate or intensify Generally, disasters are generalised
disasters indirectly. Landslides and floods due experiences of people the world over, and no
to deforestation, unscientific land use and _ two disasters are similar and comparable to
construction activities in fragile areas aresome each other. Every disaster is unique in terms
of the disasters that are the results ofindirect of the local socio-environmental factors that
human actions. Can you identify some other control it, the social response it generates, and
human activities going on in and around your _ the way each social group negotiates with it.
neighbourhood and schools that can lead to However, the opinion mentioned above is
disasters in the near future? Can you suggest indicative of three important things. Firstly, the
some measures to prevent it? Itisacommon magnitude, intensity, frequency and damages
experience that human-made disasters have caused by natural disasters have increased
increased both in their numbers and _ over the years. Secondly, there is a growing
magnitudes over the years and concerted concern among people the world over to deal
efforts are on at various levels to prevent and — with the menace created by these so that the
minimise their occurrences. Though the loss of human life and property can be
success has been only nominal so far, it is | minimised. And finally, significant changes
possible to prevent some of these disasters have taken place in the pattern of natural
created by human actions. As opposed to this, disasters over the years.
very little is possible to prevent natural There has also been a change in the
disasters; therefore, the best way out is to perception of natural disasters and hazards.
emphasise on natural disaster mitigation and Previously, hazards and disasters were seen
management. Establishment of National as two closely associated and interrelated
Institute of Disaster Management, India, Earth phenomena, i.e. areas prone to natural
Summit at Rio de Janeiro, Brazil, 1993 and _ hazards, were more vulnerable to disasters.
the World Conference on Disaster Management Hence, people avoided tampering with the
in May 1994 at Yokohama, Japan, etc. are delicate balance that existed in a given
some of the concrete steps towards this ecosystem. People avoided intensification of
direction initiated at different levels. their activities in such areas and that is how
Most often it is observed that scholars use disasters were less damaging. Technological
disasters and natural hazards as interchangeable. power has given large capacity to human
Both are related phenomena, yet quite distinct intervention in nature. Consequently, now,
from each other. Hence, it is necessary to human beings tend to intensify their activities
distinguish between the two. into disaster prone areas increasing their
Natural Hazards are elements of — vulnerability todisasters. Colonisation of flood
circumstances in the Natural environment that plains of most of the rivers and development of
have the potential to cause harm to people or __ large cities and port-towns like - Mumbai and
property or both. These may be swift or Chennai along the coast, and touching the
permanent aspects of the respective shore due to high land values, make them
environmental settings like currents in the | vulnerable to the occurrence of cyclones,
oceans, steep slope and unstable structural hurricanes and tsunamis.
an



NATURAL HAZARDS AND DISASTERS 79
These observations can also be corroborated CLassIFICATION OF NATURAL DISASTERS
by the data given in Table 7.1 showing the
yee 8 € Human beings the world over have
magnitude of deaths caused by twelve serious . . .
natural disasters in the past sixty years in experienced disasters and have faced and lived
different countries of the world with them. Now people are becoming aware
It is evident from the table that natural and various steps have been initiated at
disasters have caused widespread loss of life and different levels for mitigating the effects of
property. Concerted efforts are on at various disasters. Identification and classification of
levels to take appropriate measures to deal with disasters is being considered as an effective and
the situation. It is also being felt that the damages scientific step to deal promptly and efficiently
caused by natural disasters have global with the disasters. Broadly, natural disasters
repercussions that are beyond the means and C8 be classified under four categories (See
capabilities of individual nation-states to cope Table 7.2). . .
up with. Hence, this issue was raised at the U.N. India is one of those countries which has
General Assembly in 1989 and it was finally experienced most of the natural disasters
formalised at the World Conference on Disaster. mentioned in Table 7.2. Every year it loses
Managementin May 1994 at Yokohama, Japan. thousands of lives and property worth
This was subsequently called the Yokohama millions of rupees due to these natural
Strategy and Plan of Action for a Safer World. calamities. In the following section, some of
Table 7.1 : Top Twelve Natural Disasters Since 1948
1948 The Soviet Union (now Russia) Earthquakes 110,000
1949 China Floods 57,000
1954 China Floods 30,000
1965 East Pakistan (now Bangladesh) Tropical Cyclones 36,000
1968 Tran Earthquakes 30,000
1970 Peru Earthquakes 66,794
1970 East Pakistan (now Bangladesh) Tropical Cyclones 500,000
1971 India Tropical Cyclones 30,000
1976 China Earthquakes 700,000
1990 Tran Earthquakes 50,000
2004 Indonesia, Sri Lanka, India, ete. Tsunamis 500,000*
2005 Pakistan, India Earthquakes 70,000*
Source : United Nations Environmental Programme (UNEP), 1991
*News Report from National Institute for Disaster Management, Government of India, New Delhi
Table 7.2 : Classification of Natural Disasters
Blizzards Earthquakes Floods Plants and Animals as
Thunderstorms Voleanic Eruptions | Tidal Waves colonisers (Locusts, etc.).
Lightning Landslides Ocean Currents | Insects infestation— fungal,
Tornadoes Avalanches Storm Surge bacterial and viral diseases
Tropical Cyclone Subsidence Tsunami such as bird flu, dengue,
Drought Soil Erosion ete.
Hailstorm
Frost, Heat Wave or
Loo.Cold Waves, etc.



80 INDIA : PHYSICAL ENVIRONMENT
Yokohama Strategy and International Decade for Natural Disaster Reduction (IDNDR)
Yokohama Strategy and Plan of Action for a Safer World
All the member states of the United Nations and other states met at the World Conference on
Natural Disaster Reduction in the city of Yokohama from May 23rd-27th 1994. It acknowledged
that the impact of natural disasters in terms of human and economic losses has risen in recent
years, and society, in general, has become vulnerable to natural disasters. It also accepted that
these disasters affected the poor and disadvantageous groups the worst, particularly in the
developing countries, which are ill-equipped to cope with them. Hence, the conference adopted
the Yokohama strategy as a guide to rest of the decade and beyond, to mitigate the losses due to

these disasters.

The resolution of the World Conference on Natural Disasters Reduction is as mentioned below:
(i) It will note that each country has the sovereign responsibility to protect its citizens from
natural disasters;

(ii) It will give priority attention to the developing countries, particularly the least developed,
land-locked countries and small-island developing states;

(iii) It will develop and strengthen national capacities and capabilities and, where appropriate,
national legislation for natural and other disaster prevention, mitigation and preparedness,
including the mobilisation of non-governmental organisations and participation of local
communities;

(iv) It will promote and strengthen sub-regional, regional and international cooperation in activities
to prevent, reduce and mitigate natural and other disasters, with particular emphasis on:

(a) human and institutional capacity-building and strengthening;

(b) technology sharing: the collection, the dissemination and utilisation of information; and
(c) mobilisation of resources.

It also declared the decade 1990-2000 as the International Decade for Natural Disaster

Reduction (IDNDR).

the highly devastating natural disasters have been of earthquakes in your book Fundamentals
discussed, particularly in the context of India. of Physical Geography (NCERT, 2006).
Earthquakes that are of tectonic origin have
NaTuRAL DISASTERS AND Hazarps IN INDIA proved to be the most devastating and their
. . . area of influence is also quite large. These
It was discussed in one of the previous chapters arthquak It fi i f earth
that India is vast and diverse in terms of its cartaquakes result irom a serics ol car
hysical and io-cultural attributes. It i movements brought about by a sudden release
paysica’ and’ socio-cullural arr ouics. Sof energy during the tectonic activities in the
largely due to its vast geographical area, earth’s crust. As compared to these. the
environmental diversities and cultural ust mp . oe
luralities that scholars often described it earthquakes associated with volcanic
Plu . «ae . eruption, rock fall, landslides, subsidence,
using two meaningful adjectives like the articularly in the mining areas, impoundin.
‘Indian-subcontinent’ and the ‘land of unity in P wary . 6 » mpou 8
diversity’. Its vastness in terms of natural of dams and reservoirs, etc. have limited area of
. ° . wth ¢ . influence and the scale of damage.
attributes combined with its prolonged colonial . .
we . . It was mentioned in Chapter 2 of the book
past, continuing various forms of social . . .
discriminations and al ally lz that the Indian plate is moving at a speed of one
scriminations anc aiso cqually ‘arge centimetre per year towards the north and
population have enhanced its vulnerability to rtheast directi d thi t of
natural disasters. These observations canalso — DOTMeastern Carection an S movement ©
be illustrated by focussing on some of the plates is being constantly obstructed by the
maior natural disasters in India Eurasian plate from the north. As a result of this,
J . both the plates are said to be locked with each
Earthquakes diferent poinisof ime, Excessive aecumulation
Earthquakes are by far the most unpredictable —_ of energy results in building up of stress, which
and highly destructive of all the natural ultimately leads to the breaking up of the lock
disasters. You have already learnt the causes and the sudden release of energy causes



NATURAL HAZARDS AND DISASTERS 81
earthquakes along the Himalayan arch. Some areas vulnerable to these earthquakes are the
of the most vulnerable states are Jammu and North-east states, areas to the north of Darbhanga
Kashmir, Himachal Pradesh, Uttaranchal, and Araria along the Indo-Nepal border in Bihar,
Sikkim, and the Darjiling and subdivision ofWest — Uttaranchal, Western Himachal Pradesh (around
Bengal and all the seven states of the northeast. Dharamshala) and Kashmir Valley in the
Himalayan region and the Kuchchh (Gujarat).
i ey Rae ey SS These are included in the Very High Damage Risk
“ys IIE: RN An gi < Zone. Similarly, the remaining parts of Jammu
Reet Epes ety Se Pa Sa and Kashmir, Himachal Pradesh, Northern parts
a tS ei De) Se of Punjab, Eastern parts of Haryana, Delhi,
Se ’ 7) : “a Western Uttar Pradesh, and Northern Bihar fall
ae -
£, NAO ree Seu oe under the High Damage Risk Zone. Remaining
a F A x pe i eek , parts of the country fall under moderate to very
io i i a ie hey a fe) re Low Damage Risk Zone. Most of the areas that
Va t ree ee F 5. can be considered safe are from the stable
7 P p ] ' S , ! 4 j landmass covered under the Deccan plateau.
hs OF cen
= steed ee en ll Be Socio-Environmental Consequences of
Figure 7.1: A Damaged Building Due toan Earthquake = Earthquakes
Apart from these regions, the central-western The idea of an earthquake is often associated with
parts of India, particularly Gujarat (in 1819 fear and horror due to the scale, magnitude and
1956 and 2001) and Maharashtra (in 1967 an d suddenness at which it spreads disasters on the
1993) have also experienced some severe surface of the earth withou t discrimination. tt
earthquakes. Earth scientists have found it becomes a calamity when it strikes the areas of
difficult to explain the oce nce of earthquakes high density of population. It not only damages
in one of the oldest, most stable and mature and destroys ne Seitlements. intrastmeture,
landmass of Peninsular block for a long time. transport and communication network,
Recently, some earth scientists have come up industries and other developmental activities but
with a theory of emergence of a fault line and also robs the population of their material and
energy build-up along the fault line represented socio-cultural gains that they have preserved
by the river Bhima (Krishna) near Latur and over generations. It renders them homeless,
Osmanabad (Maharashtra) and the possible which puts an extra-pressure and stress,
breaking down of the Indian plate (Figure 7.2) particularly on the weak economy of the
; . developing countries.
National Geophysical Laboratory,
Geological Survey of India, Department of
Meteorology, Government of India, along with Effects of Earthquakes
the recently formed National Institute of Disaster | Earthquakes have all encompassing disastrous
Management, have made an intensive analysis __ effects on the area of their occurrence. Some of
of more than 1,200 earthquakes that have the important ones are listed in Table 7.3.
occurred in India in different years in the past, :
and based on these, they divided India into the
following five earthquake zones: OnGround — | On Manmade On Water
) vi hich d k Structures
@ ery high damage risk zone - ;
8 . . Fissures Cracking Waves
ci Morlorate damage ck zone Settlements Slidings Hydro-Dynamic
Pressure
(iv) Low damage risk zone Landslides Overturning | Tsunami
(v) Very low damage risk zone. Liquefaction Buckling
Earth Pressure | Collapse
Out of these, the first two zones had Possible m
experienced some of the most devastating Chain-effects | Possible Possible
earthquakes in India. As shown in the Figure 7.2, Chain-effects_ | Chain-effects



T
82 INDIA : PHYSICAL ENVIRONMENT
68°E 72° 76° 80° 84° 88° 92° 96°E
36°N cao“ :
a \, _ INDIA 36°N
Z < 4 EARTHQUAKE HAZARD ZONES
t@ _
32° a aa °
PAKISTAN c @ ; *
r >
= _ ]
L \N eS Steet )
ag° e S
oN Db Veh. Che
oo Chen’ é “TY BHUTAN
UNG SEE AA ‘Laps
y ~ WN ~
PEELE ANS
¥ Ns I ae . 2°
eet SS , SSS Tropic of Cancer
hs SS EQS \N | a
PEE EEEESS eg i ~
20° WDE WSS Ne
araBian) — KEE PNG) payor %&
SEA KAEDDUDEIAN, DEDEDEDEDED gy BENGAL <
NNSSHSEEEEEEEEEN SEED
)\ NEN YS
WESSESE gid SY = Very high damage .
1° Oye SEES SHEN risk zone (MSK IX) Siro
forges) High damage
NEA SS risk zone (MSK VIII) °
finery Se riniy Mod: di .
\ A [I isezono asiiy |g
RMYereiist/ 4 Low damage
12° YS S RN risk zone (MSK vi) M7 ® 12°
aoe ~ Very low damage
ef ° N risk zone (MSK V) . %
- ‘
<unpcee \ ANDAMAN oper ISLANDS
LAK eos °
2°N (INDIA) S ; 0 200 400 600 km 4
. ne —$_—————— ° eN
INDIAN , OCEAN oe
TPE 76° g4° 88° 92°E 9
Figure 7.2 : India: Earthquake Hazard Zones
|



NATURAL HAZARDS AND DISASTERS 83
Apart from these, earthquakes also have Tsunami
some serious and far-reaching environmental Earthquakes and volcanic eruptions that
consequences. Surface seismic waves produce cause the sea-floor to move abruptly resultin
fissures on the upper layers ofthe earth’scrust —, . Pry rest 8
. . in sudden displacement of ocean water in the
through which water and other volatile form of high vertical waves are called ts .
materials gush out, inundating the ig x oe unams
A oo = (harbour waves) or seismic sea waves.
neighbouring areas. Earthquakes are also sras
. , Normally, the seismic waves cause only one
responsible for landslides and often these . i an
. . A instantaneous vertical wave; but, after the initial
cause obstructions in the flow of rivers and . .
. . . disturbance, a series of afterwaves are created
channels resulting in the formation of , . .
. . . , in the water that oscillate between high crest
reservoirs. Sometimes, rivers also change their .
. chee t and low trough in order to restore the water
course causing floods and other calamities in -
the affected areas level.
, The speed of wave in the ocean depends
Barthguake Hazard Meigaton ee ee ee
Unlike other disasters, the damages caused result of this, the impact of tsunamiis less over
by earthquakes are more devastating. Since the ocean and more near the coast where they
it also destroys most of the transport and cause large-scale devastations. Therefore, a
communication links, providing timely relief | ship at sea is not much affected by tsunami
to the victims becomes difficult. It is not and it is difficult to detect a tsunami in the
possible to prevent the occurrence of an deeper parts of sea. It is so because over deep
earthquake; hence, the next best option is to water the tsunami has very long wave-length
emphasis on disaster preparedness and and limited wave-height. Thus, a tsunami wave
mitigation rather than curative measures _ raises the ship only a metre or two and each
such as: rise and fall takes several minutes. As opposed
. wae oo to this, when a tsunami enters shallow water,
@ Establishing earthquake monitoring its wave-length gets reduced and the period
centres {seismological centres) for remains unchanged, which increases the wave-
regular one _ and ast height. Sometimes, this height can be up to
issemination of information amongthe 15m or more, which causes large-scale
people in the vulnerable areas. Use of —_destructions along the shores. Thus, these are
Geographical Positioning System (GPS) also called Shallow Water Waves. Tsunamis
can be of great help in monitoring the —_are frequently observed along the Pacific ring
. movement of tectonic plates. of fire, particularly along the coast of Alaska,
(ii) Preparing a vulnerability _map of the Japan, Philippines, and other islands of South-
valnerability isk agissemination on east Asia, Indonesia, Malaysia, Myanmar, Sri
vulnerability risk information among the Lanka, and India etc.
people and educating them about the After reaching the coast, the tsunami waves
ways and means minimising the adverse _ release enormous energy stored in them and
. impacts of disasters. | water flows turbulently onto the land
(iii) Modifying the house types and building- _ destroying port-cities and towns, structures,
designs in the vulnerable areas and buildings and other settlements. Since the
discouraging construction of high-rise coastal areas are densely populated the world
buildings, large industrial establishments over, and these are also centres of intense
and big urban centres in such areas. human activity, the loss of life and property is
(iv) Finally, making it mandatory to adopt likely to be much higher by a tsunami as
earthquake-resistant designs and use compared to other natural hazards in the
light materials in major construction coastal areas. The extent of devastation caused
activities in the vulnerable areas. by tsunami can be assessed through the



TT
84 INDIA : PHYSICAL ENVIRONMENT
visuals on Banda Ache (Indonesia) presented (i) Large and continuous supply of warm
in the book Practical Worle in Geography - Part I and moist air that can release enormous
(NCERT, 2006). latent heat.

Unlike other natural hazards, the (ii) Strong Coriolis force that can prevent
mitigation of hazards created by tsunami is filling of low pressure at the centre
difficult, mainly because of the fact that losses (absence of Coriolis force near the
are on a much larger scale. equator prohibits the formation of

tropical cyclone between 0°-5°
LE ath \ s latitude).
a Ape gg Pe (iii) Unstable condition through the
m i 4 i ee 4 troposphere that creates local disturbances
i by WA J. around whicha_ cyclone develops.
eS we . (iv) Finally, absence of strong vertical wind
decent of $0 a wedge, which disturbs the vertical
Pe sas re transport of latent heat.
a Ce ee —— =
a eS a Structure of Tropical Cyclone
Bk aj eT, en Rat P= Tropical cyclones are characterised by large
IPAS SN PGA ' tlle 2 pressure gradients. The centre of the cyclone
Figure 7.3 : Tsunami Affected Area is mostly a warm and low-pressure,

It is beyond the capacity of individual state | cloudless core known as eye of the storm.
or government to mitigate the damage. Hence, Generally, the isobars are closely placed to
combined efforts at the internationallevelsare ¢ach other showing high-pressure
the possible ways of dealing with these gradients. Normally, it varies between
disasters as has been in the case ofthe tsunami =: 14-1 7mb/100 km, but sometimes it can be
that occurred on 26th December 2004 in which as high as 6Omb/100km. Expansion of the
more than 300,000 people lost their lives. ndia wind belt is about 10-150 km from the
has volunteered to join the International centre.

Tsunami Warning System after the December

2004 tsunami disaster. Spatio-temporal Distribution of Tropical

Cyclone in India

Tropical Cyclone Owing to its Peninsular shape surrounded
Tropical cyclones are intense low-pressure by the Bay of Bengal in the east and the
areas confined to the area lying between 30°N Arabian Sea in the west, the tropical
and 30° S latitudes, in the atmosphere around cyclones in India also originate in these two
which high velocity winds blow. Horizontally, important locations. Though most of the
it extends up to 500-1,000 km and vertically cyclones originate between 10°-15° north
from surface to 12-14 km. A tropical cyclone latitudes during the monsoon season, yet
or hurricane is like a heat engine that is in case of the Bay of Bengal, cyclones
energised by the release of latent heat on mostly develop during the months of
account of the condensation of moisture that October and November. Here, they
the wind gathers after moving over the oceans _ originate between 16°-2° N latitudes and
and seas. to the west of 92° E. By July the place of

There are differences of opinion among __ origin of these storms shifts to around 18° N
scientists about the exact mechanism of a latitude and west of 90°E near the
tropical cyclone. However, some initial Sunderban Delta. Table 7.4 and Figure 7.4
conditions for the emergence of a tropical show the frequency and tracks of time of
cyclone are: cyclonic storms in India.

an



NATURAL HAZARDS AND DISASTERS 85
68°E 72° 76° 80° 84° 88° 92° 96°E
wae
36°N (oo oe ox
0S INDIA 36
roo) TROPICAL CYCLONE HAZARD ZONES
eere
pee ee
(- eee
"Nee eee &
32° SLL SL 32°
PAKISTAN OC X66674
é rrr
r ‘er oN
; eee ES
7 C602 CHINA
/ L279 s. (TIBET) L
28° a 4 - Z us
2 oc “M. yo™ . tv ames
gre Ye o, Be AC Bos r
« ann,” 2 TF suuran® ou
5 ~ : ?
2 Sa \ Nae vr
\. NN BD, 3
\ { 1
: . 3 ¢
mee I N D I A py Nm ;
- “oe Ore eee «, BANGLADESH . °
~ . oe fit a a a a a 4 J 24
PEEP EAN pit LLL EEE EEE EEE EEE . oF Jessonnnnereensersenesn ed
OPE LES LLP LEIP PEP PO TIT TT CO Tropic of Cancer
oe aes BPP EEE ELE P PEE EEPPE LEE 1 Ro
“ve W\eceeeereereereersereeeses : yo
i a a a a a a a a a a a a 1
W255 2207 SPL LS SE Y ~
20° PEL EL EELS ee ee OH MYANMAR
Neer e re erey ARS 20°
ARABIAN Wieeeeeeee 22 ONS sy BAY OF nt
SEA eee e ee eee fee 4 e& BENGAL XY
a a a a aaae 9
ee eee ee. >
IY Me oe eee SS =
Ny COM eee | Ss i Very high damage
6 Def Ne SS risk zone -A (V = 55m/s)
16 SP ee Very high damage 4
i fcrenaaaaee aN [1 iisk’zone-B (V = 50m/s) "wah
TY High damage
we “fie
oleledele) CoS [| risk zone (V = 47m/s) °
SOO Moderate damage .
yoo “ KS] tisk zone -A (V = 44m/s) e
° Celeiife Moderate damage 5
12 Wigs ¥ risk zone -B (V = 39m/s) She ° 12°
oe, oe Low damage .9°
°,? . y risk zone (V = 34m/s) * 8
eo fe g
. ° oe ee ANDAMAN & NICOBAR ISLANDS
LAKSHADWEEP eeee cm (INDIA)
(INDIA) “4. ww °
8°N fer 0 200 400 600 km Q
° ¢ $i) “og 8°N
INDIAN , OCEAN %
72°E 76° 4° 88° 92° 9
Figure 7.4 : Tropical Cyclone Hazard Zones



TT
86 INDIA : PHYSICAL ENVIRONMENT
disasters, the causes of floods are well-
established. Floods are relatively slow in
Sea occurrences and often, occur in well-identified
January 4 (1.3) * 2 (2.4) regions and within expected time in a year.
February 1 (0.3) 0 (0.0) Floods occur commonly when water in the
Apa tee 8 (o's) form of surface run-off exceeds the carrying
May 28 (8.9) 13 (15.9) capacity of the river channels and streams and
June 34 (10.8) 13 (15.9) flows into the neighbouring low-lying flood
July 38 (12.1) 3 (3.7) plains. At times, this even goes beyond the
August 25 (8.0) (1.2) capacity of lakes and other inland water bodies
September 27 (8.6) 4 (4.8) : :
October 53 (16.9) 17 (20.7) in which they flow. Floods can also be caused
November 56 (17.8) 21 (25.6) due to a storm surge (in the coastal areas), high
December 26 (8.3) 3 (3.7) intensity rainfall for a considerably longer time
period, melting of ice and snow, reduction in
*Data in the brackets are in percentage to total number the infiltration rate and presence of eroded
of storms taking place in a year material in the water due to higher rate of soil
. erosion. Though floods occur frequently over
Consequences of Tropical Cyclones wide geographical area having disasterous
It was mentioned that the energy to the tropical ramifications in many parts of the world, floods
cyclone comes from the latent heat released by in the South, Southeast and East Asian
the warm moist air. Hence, with the increase countries, particularly in China, India and
in distance from the sea, the force of the cyclone Bangladesh, are frequent and equally
decreases. In India, the force of the cyclone disastrous.
decreases with increase in distance from the Once again, unlike other natural disasters,
Bay of Bengal and the Arabian Sea. So, the | Human beings play an important role in the
coastal areas are often struck by severe cyclonic genesis as well as spread of floods.
storms with an average velocity of 180 km/h. Indiscriminate deforestation, unscientific
Often, this results in abnormal rise in the sea _ agricultural practices, disturbances along the
level known as Storm Surge. natural drainage channels and colonisation of
flood-plains and river-beds are some of the
A surge is generated due to interaction human activities that play an important role
of air, sea and land. The cyclone provides in increasing the intensity, magnitude and
the driving force in the form of very high gravity of floods.
horizontal pressure-gradient and very -
strong surface winds. The sea water flows =—.. " sy 4
across the coast along with strong winds : na . a
and heavy downpour. a
This results in inundation of human a
settlements, agricultural fields, damaging
crops and destruction of structures created by
human beings.
Floods
You read in newspapers and watch images of
floods on televisions occurring in some regions
during rainy seasons. Inundation of land and
human settlements by the rise of water in the
channels and its spill-over presents the
condition of flooding. Unlike other natural Figure 7.5 : Brahmaputra During Flood
an



NATURAL HAZARDS AND DISASTERS 87
68°E 72° 76° 80° 84° 88° 92° 96°E
34,
36°N St .,
i ve INDIA 36N
: Ye, eine)
r ] FLOOD HAZARD ZONES
c
PAKISTAN ! i 4
& a
32° Re L.. .
SO Sha aS et 32°
Ns 2 ;
e m
wi ~S CHINA
su < (TIBET)
m4 ¥ “Ss Tsangpo R. rr
28° * 7? % : +, <= r ay
72 — ep i Tp we i ¥ Ce ales ’
( &, Aa @ S 4 , ¥ oe
ha = %n, 6, PO, J € BHUTAN Li
if 1 hag end yee ¢
\) us ot 0 Dee TAN Sis, ;
yN <* ae f...., ¢
97th $ & De Te eet AN TB aNGLADESH J” i 5
i g e s r} oT Nmed i
a ¢ Wf
Ye veetvsepnennfeee A nsnstnenennrenenenneneseneesctan gern Rl AB Fes Tie of Cancel
FW i iS
bs narmada R. lp
"ap % (4 al MYANMAR
20° é Ds Mahanacy 0°
22798 fe <> a)
Lore, " y R
R v
s
ARABIAN \, : BAY OF
SEA BENGAL
i Se,
8 € y sy) a
¥ bs beth
agen
°
x of .
fF iw [] Area Liable to Flood} jf * 7
S .
12°
xf " “¥
, A “¢
* Je ANDAMAN & NICOBAR ISLANDS
LAKSHADWEEP a (INDIA)
(INDIA) oF oo ‘oo cook °
0 m
8°N ° —_—_— "os 8°N
INDIAN , OCEAN %
72°E 76° 84° 88° 92°E Q
Figure 7.6 : Flood Hazard Zones



TT
88 INDIA : PHYSICAL ENVIRONMENT
Various states of India face heavy loss of | governments generally respond to the floods?
lives and property due to recurrent floods. Construction of flood protection embankments
Rashtriya Barh Ayog (National Flood _ inthe flood-prone areas, construction of dams,
Commission) identified 40 million hectares of | afforestation and discouraging major
land as flood-prone in India. The Figure 7.6 construction activities in the upper reaches of
shows the flood-affected areas in India. Assam, most of the flood-creating rivers, etc. are some
West Bengal and Bihar are among the high __ steps that need to be taken up on urgent basis.
flood-prone states of India. Apart from these, Removal of human encroachment from the
most of the rivers in the northern states like river channels and depopulating the flood
Punjab and Uttar Pradesh, are also vulnerable plains can be the other steps. This is
to occasional floods. It has been noticed that particularly true in western and northern parts
states like Rajasthan, Gujarat, Haryana and __ of the country which experience flash-floods.
Punjab are also getting inundated in recent Cyclone centres may provide relief in coastal
decades due to flash floods. This is partly areas which are hit by a storm surge.
because of the pattern of the monsoon and
partly because of blocking of most of the Droughts
streams and river channels by human The term ‘drought’ is applied to an extended
activities. Sometimes, Tamil Nadu period when there is a shortage of water
experiences flooding during November- availability due to inadequate precipitation,
January due to the retreating monsoon. excessive rate of evaporation and
over-utilisation of water from the reservoirs and
Consequence and Control of Floods other storages, including the ground water.
Frequent inundation of agricultural land and
human settlement, particularly in Assam, West Drought is a complex phenomenon as it
Bengal, Bihar and Eastern Uttar Pradesh involves elements of meteorology like
(flooding rivers), coastal areas of Orissa, Andhra Re ueeS Get ge ges evapo-
Pradesh, Tamil Nadu and Gujarat (cyclone) and Se Se
so . 7 moisture, storage and surface run-off,
Punjab, Rajasthan, Northern Gujarat and agricultural practices, particularly the
Haryana (flash floods) have serious types of crops grown, socio-economic
consequences on the national economy and practices and ecological conditions.
society. Floods do not only destroy valuable
crops every year but these also dai e physical
infrastrucure such as roads, wails, bridge and Types of Droughts
human settlements. Millions of people are Meteorological Drought: It is a situation when
rendered homeless and are also washed down there is a prolonged period of inadequate
along with their cattle in the floods. Spread of rainfall marked with mal-distribution of the
diseases like cholera, gastro-enteritis, hepatitis same over time and space.
food affected areas, Trowever hoods sso nahe Agricultural Drought : It is also known as soil
we ae > moisture drought, characterised by low soil
a few positive contributions. Every year, floods moisture that is necessary to support the crops.
deposit fertile silt over agricultural fields which thereb lting i OnE ail eP Moreo op if
is good for the crops. Majuli (Assam), the largest eby resulting In crop ures. : vers
oe ; : an area has more than 30 per cent ofits gross
riverine island in the world, is the best example cropped area under irrigation, the area is
of good paddy crops after the annual floods in excluded from the drought-prone category.
Brahmaputra. But these are insignificant
benefits in comparison to the grave losses. Hydrological Drought : It results when the
The Government of India as wellas the state | availability of water in different storages and
governments are well aware of the menace reservoirs like aquifers, lakes, reservoirs, etc.
created by floods every year. How do these _ falls below what the precipitation can replenish.
an



NATURAL HAZARDS AND DISASTERS 89
68°E 72° 76° 80° 84° 88° 92° 96°E
36°N a a INDIA "
‘s Ne an DROUGHT PRONE AREAS *6
& BeneN
or )
i ae
Bs S 4
- ;
% S> t- 32°
PAKISTAN Co }
2 xs
a ‘ aS
i ww ~ CHINA
? s ~~"
os ? ro (TIBET) grtn
~N e wv “6... . . ce oy
ne +p ree ic Pot f
‘WAR Ze 7 ¢ BHUTAN“, oS
NA. _ » ee Ti rc
wee foe 4 3
Away
; € BANGLADESH J °
7 a ek eo
f 1 pe ly
QS al
20° MYANMAR
4 20°
ARABIAN BAY OF \
SEA BENGAL
16° ? /
Oho
ia Zone -1 Extreme °
Da Zone -2 Severe .
L | Zone -3 Moderate nS
12° [| Drought Free Area 4, ° 4°
ee
of « oy %
2 g
= te ANDAMAN & NICOBAR ISLANDS
LAKSHADWEEP a (INDIA)
(INDIA) oy °
8°N is 0 200 400 600 km 228
—_—_—_- °5  8°N
INDIAN , OCEAN %
72°E 76° 84° 88° 92°E Q
Figure 7.8 : Drought Prone Areas



TT
90 INDIA : PHYSICAL ENVIRONMENT
Extreme Drought Affected Areas : It is evident
from the Figure 7.8 that most parts of
3 Rajasthan, particularly areas to the west of the
” Aravali hills, ice. Marusthali and Kachchh
Say ; - - ot ie A a regions of Gujarat fall in this category. Included
Dees ey oe x. are 4 here are also the districts like Jaisalmer and
ee os “ee ne =i Ss Barmer from the Indian desert that receive less
— a is see : == that 90 mm average annual rainfall.
- re Pen Ded Soa tens a Ss Severe Drought Prone Area : Parts of eastern
a = Pepe — ad Rajasthan, most parts of Madhya Pradesh,
*: ess i ot nse es eastern parts of Maharashtra, interior parts of
ee” eS a Me et gee = Andhra Pradesh and Karnataka Plateau,
eee ee eo northern parts of interior Tamil Nadu and
Figure 7.7 : Drought southern parts of Jharkhand and interior
Orissa are included in this category.
Ecological Drought : When the productivity of
a natural ecosystem fails due to shortage of Moderate D rought Affected Area : Northern
water and as a consequence of ecological Parts of Rajasthan, Haryana, southern districts
distress, damages are induced in the of Uttar Pradesh, the remaining parts of
ecosystem. Gujarat, Maharashtra except Konkan,
Various parts of India experience these Jharkhand and Coimbatore plateau of Tamil
droughts recurrently which result in some Nadu and interior Karnataka are included in
serious socio-economic and ecological problems. _ this category. The remaining parts of India can
be considered either free or less prone to the
Drought Prone Areas in India drought.
Indian agriculture has been heavily dependent — Consequences of Drought
on the monsoon rainfall. Droughts and floods . ;
are the two accompanying features of Indian Proughts have cascading effects on various
climate. According to some estimates, nearly _ ther aspects of environment and society. Crop
19 per cent of the total geographical area of failure leading to scarcity of food grains (akal),
the country and 12 per cent of its total fodder (trinkal), inadequate rainfall, resulting
population suffer due to drought every year. 1 shortage of water (jalkal), and often shortage
About 30 per cent of the country’s totalareais in all the three (trikal) is most devastating.
identified as drought prone affecting around _- Large-scale death of cattle and other animals,
50 million people. It isa common experience ‘Migration of humans and livestock are the
that while some parts of the country reel under + ™ost common sight to be seen in the drought-
floods, there are regions that face severe affected areas. Scarcity of water compels people
drought during the same period. Moreover, it | t0 consume contaminated water resulting in
is also a common sight to witness that one Spread of many waterborne diseases like
region suffers due to floods in one seasonand _gastro-enteritis, cholera, hepatitis, ete.
experiences drought in the other. This is mainly Droughts have both immediate as well as
because of the large-scale variations and long-term disastrous consequences on the
unpredictability in the behaviour of the social and physical environments.
monsoon in India. Thus, droughts are Consequently, planning for drought has to
widespread andcommon phenomenainmost take both aspects into consideration.
parts of the country, but these are most Provision for the distribution of safe drinking
recurrent and severe in some and not soin. water, medicines for the victims and
others. On the basis of severity of droughts, availability of fodder and water for the cattle
India can be divided into the following regions: and shifting of the people and their livestock
ae



TT
NATURAL HAZARDS AND DISASTERS 91
to safer places, etc. are some steps thatneed human activities, India has been divided into
to be taken immediately. Identification of | anumber of zones.
ound water potential in the form of aquifers, . ay.
fransfer of niver water from the surplus tothe 14 ndslide Vulnerability Zones
deficit areas, and particularly planning for —_ Very High Vulnerability Zone : Highly unstable,
inter-linking of rivers and construction of relatively young mountainous areas in the
reservoirs and dams, etc. should be given a Himalayas and Andaman and Nicobar, high
serious thought. Remote sensing and satellite rainfall regions with steep slopes in the Western
imageries can be useful in identifying the Ghats and Nilgiris, the north-eastern regions,
possible river-basins that can be inter-linked along with areas that experience frequent
and in identifying the ground water potential. _ ground-shaking due to earthquakes, etc. and
Dissemination of knowledge about areas of intense human activities, particularly
drought-resistant crops and proper training —_ {hose related to construction of roads, dams,
to practise the same can be some of the ate. are included in this zone.
long-term measures that will be helpful in
drought-mitigation. Rainwater harvesting can High Vulnerability Zone : Areas that have
also be an effective method in minimising the almost similar conditions to those included in
effects of drought. the very high vulnerability zone are also
included in this category. The only difference
Observe the methods adopted for roof- between these two is the combination, intensity
top rainwater harvesting in your and frequency of the controlling factors. All the
TASS Bee Sa AOR ae Himalayan states and the states from the
cia north-eastern regions except the plains of
Assam are included in the high vulnerability
Landslides zones.
Have you ever read about the blocking ofroads = Moderate to Low Vulnerability Zone : Areas that
to Srinagar or disruption of rail services by receive less precipitation such as Trans-
stones falling on the Konkan Railway track? It Himalayan areas of Ladakh and Spiti (Himachal
happens due to landslide, which is the rapid —_ pradesh), undulated yet stable relief and low
sliding of large mass of bedrocks. Disasters precipitation areas in the Aravali, rain shadow
due to landslides, are in general, far less areas in the Western and Eastern Ghats and
dramatic than due to earthquakes, volcanic — heecan plateau also experience occasional
eruptions, tsunamis and cyclones but their jandslides. Landslides due to mining and
impact on the natural environment and
national economy is in no way less severe.
Unlike other disasters that are sudden,
unpredictable and are largely controlled by = ae
macro or regional factors, landslides are largely ee = S ~ oe SF os ™
controlled by highly localised factors. Hence, Pee a yee er, ey
gathering information and monitoring the a en aa any as
possibilities of landslide is not only difficult but : OO) ROP aa ee eat
also immensely cost-intensive. Ew “ se x Ses =
It is always difficult to define in a precise ee eR NT tS Se: 5
statement and generalise the occurrence and — bee 2S rr A EARS beh) hh Siese 2 ;
behaviour of a landslide. However, on the B/N aig il AN suet gas, ae
’ 4 a! Seth Ate t A yr Y
basis of past experiences, frequency and =: tT Wee See se ot
certain causal relationships with the at aay rapes Le Sr
controlling factors like geology, geomorphic (eee ey
agents, slope, land-use, vegetation cover and ~ Figure 7.9 : Landslide —
LL



92 INDIA : PHYSICAL ENVIRONMENT
subsidence are most common in states like to some extent. Construction of cyclone-
Jharkhand, Orissa, Chhattisgarh, Madhya shelters, embankments, dykes, reservoirs and
Pradesh, Maharashtra, Andhra Pradesh, afforestation to reduce the speed of the winds
Karnataka, Tamil Nadu, Goa and Kerala. are some of the steps that can help in
Other Areas : The remaining parts of India, munimising the damages. However, merease
: . . the loss of life and property in countries like
particularly states like Rajasthan, Haryana, . : -
. India, Bangladesh, Myanmar, etc. in successive
Uttar Pradesh, Bihar, West Bengal (except : : aye
«dat ways ar : storms is largely due to high vulnerability of
district Darjiling), Assam (except district Karbi their population residing in the coastal areas
Anglong) and Coastal regions of the southern pop 8 ,
States are safe as far as landslides are
concerned. Disaster Management Bill, 2005
: The Disaster Management Bill, 2005,
Consequences of Landslides defines disaster as a catastrophe,
Landslides have relatively small and localised mishap, calamity or grave occurrence
area of direct influence, but roadblock, affecting any area, arising from
destruction of railway lines and channel- natural or man-made causes, or by
blocking due to rock-falls have far-reaching accident or negligence which results
consequences. Diversion of river courses due in substantial loss of life or human
to landslides can also lead to flood and loss of suffering or damage to, and
life and property. It also makes spatial destruction of, environment, and is of
interaction difficult, risky as well as a costly such nature or magnitude as to be
affair, which, in turn, adversely affects the beyond the coping capacity of the
developmental activities in these areas. community of the affected area.
Mitigation ConcLusIon
It is always advisable to ad opt area-specific On the basis of the above discussion, it can be
measures to deal with landslides. Restriction on .
, concluded that disasters can be natural or the
the construction and other developmental wats
wats «age results of human activities, and all hazards
activities such as roads and dams, limiting . . . se eer
. . ~ need not turn into disasters since it is difficult
agriculture to valleys and areas with moderate oe . .
to eliminate disasters, particularly natural
slopes, and control on the development of large , - -
. . ate disasters. Then the next best option is
settlements in the high vulnerability zones, should ste ccn 4a
. mitigation and preparedness. There are three
be enforced. This should be supplemented by : : : wae ae
4s . . « stages involved in disaster mitigation and
some positive actions like promoting large-scale .
5 . management:
afforestation programmes and construction of . . .
, (i) Pre-disaster management involves
bunds to reduce the flow of water. Terrace farming . . .

. A generating data and information about the
should be encouraged in the northeastern hill disasters, preparing vulnerability zonin
states where Jnumming (Slash and Burn/Shifting »P Pp ing . 8
Cultivation) is still prevalent maps and spreading awareness among the

. people about these. Apart from these,
Disaster MANAGEMENT disaster planning, preparedness and
preventive measures are other steps that
Disasters due to cyclones, unlike the ones need to be taken in the vulnerable areas.
caused by earthquakes, tsunamis and volcanic (ii) During disasters, rescue and relief
eruptions are more predictable in terms of the operations such as evacuation, construction
time and place of their occurrences. Moreover, of shelters and relief camps, supplying of
with the help of development of techniques to water, food, clothing and medical aids etc.
monitor the behaviour of cyclones, their should be done on an emergency basis.
intensity, direction and magnitude, it has (iii) Post-disaster operations should involve
become possible to manage the cyclonic hazard rehabilitation and recovery of victims. It



TT
NATURAL HAZARDS AND DISASTERS 93
should also concentrate on capacity- proportion of its population, vulnerable to
building in order to cope up with future disasters. Introduction of the Disaster
disasters, ifany. Management Bill, 2005 and establishment of
These measures have special significance National Institute of Disaster Management are
to a country like India, which has about some examples of the positive steps taken by
two-third of its geographical area and equal __ the Government of India.
EXERCISES
1. Choose the right answer from the four alternatives given below.
(i) Which one of the following states of India experiences floods frequently?
(a) Bihar (c) Assam
(b) West Bengal (d) Uttar Pradesh
(ii) In which one of the following districts of Uttaranchal did Malpa Landslide
disaster take place?
(a) Bageshwar (c) Almora
(b) Champawat (d) Pithoragarh
(iii) Which one of the following states receives floods in the winter months?
(a) Assam (c) Kerala
(b) West Bengal (d) Tamil Nadu
(iv) In which of the following rivers is the Majuli River Island situated?
(a) Ganga (c) Godavari
(b) Brahmaputra (d) Indus
(v) Under which type of natural hazards do blizzards come?
(a) Atmospheric (c) Terrestrial
(b) Aquatic (d) Biological
2. Answer the following questions in less than 30 words.
(i) When can a hazard become a disaster?
(ii) Why are there more earthquakes in the Himalayas and in the north-eastern
region of India?
(iii) What are the basic requirements for the formation of a cyclone?
(vi) How are the floods in Eastern India different from the ones in Western India?
(v) Why are there more droughts in Central and Western India?
3. Answer the following questions in not more than 125 words.
(i) Identify the Landslide-prone regions of India and suggest some measures to
mitigate the disasters caused by these.
(ii) What is vulnerability? Divide India into natural disaster vulnerability zones
based on droughts and suggest some mitigation measures.
(v) When can developmental activities become the cause of disasters?
Project/Activity
Prepare a project report on any one of the topics given below.
(i) Malpa Landslide (v) Tehri Dam/Sardar Sarovar
(ii) Tsunami (vi) Bhuj/Latur Earthquakes
(iii) Orissa and Gujarat Cyclones (vii) Life in a delta/riverine island
(iv) Inter-linking of rivers (viii) Prepare a model of rooftop rainwater
harvesting
7



