Chapter 27 Fuel and Power
General
Unlike agriculture, fuels such as coal and oil ex-
tracted from the earth can never be replaced, (the
'robber industry') and the world as a whole, is get-
ting poorer every day with such an intensive ex-
ploitation of the earth's wealth to meet modern in-
dustrial demands. At the rate that automobiles and
industrial plants are consuming petroleum, there will
come a day when the oil wells will dry up too. New
substitutes must be found if the modern civilization
created by Man is to be sustained. The question of
fuel exhaustion is an important one and measures
have already been taken by scientists and govern-
ments all over the world to conserve resources and
invent substitutes. Hydro-electricity forms a substi-
tute power resource and steps have already been
taken to harness tides and solar energy and to sup-
plant present mineral fuels with atomic or nuclear
power.
Fuel and Power
COAL
Coal, comprising mainly carbon of vegetative origin,
is one of the oldest forms of power. It provided the
basis for the Industrial Revolution. Its importance
as both fuel and raw material was greatly enhanced
with the invention of the steam engine by James
Watt in 1769. Coal became the greatest single factor
of industrial location. The pull of coalfields on indus-
trial locations was so great that the majority of the
world's manufacturing areas are located on or near
coalfields. The discovery of oil and the invention of
electricity have greatly altered the prominence of
coal in almost every field. Its low heat output, its
untidy appearance and its great bulk, which raises
transport costs, have all contributed to the decline
of coal as a modern fuel. However, in most parts of
Europe, America and some Asiatic countries, coal
is still extensively used as a domestic fuel, a source
of industrial power, and a vital raw material for the
chemicals industry. Coal yields gas, tar, benzole and
sulphate of ammonia which have many industrial
USES.
Coal mining methods. Coal, which occurs in sedi-
mentary rocks in layers or seams of varying thick-
ness, may be exposed or concealed. That which
outcrops on the surface (exposed) is easily and eco-
nomically mined by open-cast or strip-mining meth-
ods. The coal-bearing rocks are simply stripped off
by giant shovels, and the coal scooped up into the
trucks to be carried away (Fig. 27.1).
When the coal occurs underneath the earth's sur-
face in concealed beds, underground mining is nec-
essary (Plate 27.A). This involves the excavation of
the coal by drivingvertical shafts down to the seams
and removing the coal through tunnels (Fig.27.l).
This method is more expe,nsive and also more dan-
gerous. It has to take into consideration problems
of ventilation, water supply and underground trans-
port, not to mention the possibilities of gas poison-
ing, explosion and the collapse of the tunnel roofs.
There are many instances of coal miners being bur-
ied alive in the underground mines.
When the coal seam lies beneath the sea, off-shore
marine mining methods have to be employed
(Fig. 27.I).
Types of coal
There are different types of coal which vary greatly
in their prices and their industrial uses. The follow-
ing'categories of coal are arranged in descending
order of hydrocarbon content and calorific value.
1. Anthracite. This is the best coal, and constitutes
not more than 5 per cent of the world's total coal
output. It is the hardest, with the highest hydrocar-
bon content. It has very little volatile matter, is prac-
tically smokeless, burns quietly with great heat and
leaves very little ash behind. It is used mainly for
steam-raising in industrial plants and for domestic
heating. Due to its scarcity and its higher price,
anthracite is only used when other types of coal are
less suitable.
2. Bituminous coal. This the most abundant type
of coal and may be subdivided into three classes:
(a) Steam coal. lts hydrocarbon content is a little
less than that of anthracite. It is the superior grade

Fig. 27.1 The nature of
coal deposits and mining
methods
of the bituminous coal, occurring in seams that have
been highly compressed. It is black, very hard and
burns readily with great heat. As it is relatively
smokeless, like anthracite, it is extensively used as
'bunker coal' in steamships, and in locomotives and
engines where soot accumulation is undesirable'
(b) Coking coal. This is a very useful type of coal
which is burnt in closed ovens to drive off the vol-
atile matter and increase its carbon content. This
particular class of coal softens and fuses while burn-
ing and produces coke, a hard, grey porous material,
which is used in blast furnaces to extract iron from
its ores.
27.A An Australian coal mine. Notice the conveyor belt
which transports the coal and the pit-props which support
the roof. Camera Press
(c) Gas coal. This low-rank bituminous coal has
a high percentage of moisture and volatile matter.
When heated, it gives out much of its gases and
vapour which are collected for use as coal gas and
other chemical by-products.
3. Lignite or brown coal. This is the lowest category
of coal with a high moisture and ash content' It is
smoky, for it still retains some of its original vege-
tative matter. It has comparatively little carbon and
has low heat value. Half the world's lignite resources
are in West and East Germany and a quarter in the
Tula brown-coal deposits of the U.S.S.R. It is exten-
sively used for domestic heating, generating thermal
electricity and in the chemicals industry.
4. Peat. This is exlusively of vegetative matter and
represents the initial Stage of coal formation. Its car-
bon content is in the form of wood or decayed plants
and it is highly charged with moisture. A large
amount of peat is found in the bogs of Ireland and
Scotland where it is cut in pieces like turf, dried, and
burnt as domestic fuel. It has only local importance
and is not traded.
World coal distribution
Coal is mainly found in three continents, Europe,
North America and Asia. The greatest producer of
both anthracite and bituminous coal is the U.S.A.
(24 per cent), from the Pennsylvanian, Central and
Rockies Coalfields. This is followed by the U.S.S.R.
(20 per cent) from the Donbas, Kuzbas, Karaganda,
Ural and Tula coalfields. Amongst the European
producing countries, Poland is the greatest, account-
ing for 7 .5 per cent of world production. Next comes
the United Kingdom with 5 per cent. It has eighteen
coalfields flanking the Pennines and the Welsh
Mountains, in the Midlands of England and the Cen-
tral Valley of Scotland. West Germany is another
important European coal producer (3.7 per cent),

mainly from the Ruhr and Saar. The other coalfields
of Europe include the Franco-Belgian coalfield, the
Limburg (Netherlands), the Kempen or Campine
(Belgium), the Silesian field in Poland and scattered
fields in France and Spain.
In Asia, China is the largest coal-producing coun-
try and also has the greatest coal reserves. Its pro-
duction stands at 20Vo of the world total. The coal
reserves in North China, in the provinces of Shanxi
(Shansi) and Shaanxi (Shensi) are so great that it is
referred to as the 'second Pennsylvania'. Large
deposits are located in Sichuan (Szechwan), Hunan,
Yunnan, Shandong (Shantung) and Manchuria.
India's only sizeable coal deposits are in the Damo-
dar Basin centred at Raniganj. Japan has limited
coal deposits in Hokkaido, northern Kyushu and
central Honshu. She is a net importer, particularly
of coking coal. Coal is unimportant in Malaysia. The
only commercial deposit at Batu Arang, which was
developed by the Malayan Collieries Limited in 1915
was forced to close down when the Malayan Rail-
ways and the Central Electricity Board switched to
imported diesel oil.
In the southern hemisphere, coal deposits are rel-
atively insignificant. The greatest deposits are in
Australia, around Newcastle, New South Wales, and
much is exported. Greymouth and Westport are the
Fig. 27.2 The chief coalfields of the world
coal-mining towns of New Zealand. In Africa, coal
is mined in Transvaal and Natal, South Africa, and
in Zimbabwe and Nigeria. Coal is least important in
South America where scattered deposits occur in
Concepcion, Chile and southern Brazil. Fig. 27.2
shows the chief coal areas of the world and Fip. 27 .3
shows the major coal-producing nations.
PETROLEUM
Petroleum is mineral oil, organic in origin, and
occurs in the pore spaces of sedimentary rocks. It is
derived from the decomposition of marine or vege-
tative matter. It normally occurs in dome-shaped
Fig. 27.3 Major coal producers of the world IJN Statistical
Year Eook 1977
United Kingdom
2C
lchina
u.s.s.R
U.S.A
30%
>.y*,) 
*> 
*
I"U'{I , ;;TLF"
i 
l, Karaga\nd? 
.'
. 
r\Egqr 
rutt
(7 0 -r... -.
)\ 
'' '-.'.; 
shanli'jr-
v. 
' 
shtnr<l?l
a
F
\;lr
"lr5:
.$c
Scale 1: 215 000 000
.Binta Canterina

Fig.27.4lal An anticline containing oil
Fig.27.4lbl An oil trap formed by a fault
Fi1.27.4(cl An oil pool imprisoned by a non-porous dyke

anticlines, between two layers of non-porous rocks
as shown in Fig. 27.a@). The oil is usually trapped
in the crest of the anticline with gas above and water
below. Oil traps may also result from faults as in
Fig. 27.4$) when porous and non-porous strata are
brought into juxtaposition. In volcanic districts,
when a resistant impermeable dyke is intruded into
alternating layers of rock, it may act as a cap rock
imprisoning a pool of gas, oil and water. This is illus-
trated in Fig. 27.4(c).
Besides its liquid form, oil may also be extracted
in its gaseous state as natural gas. This consists
mainly of methane and ethane and is increasingly
used for heating, lighting and the chemicals industry.
In America, Europe, Russia and New Zealand, nat-
ural gas is pumped through pipes for use in house-
holds and industrial plants.
Another interesting product mined in connection
with petroleum is asphalt or bitumen or pitch. It is,
in fact, highly viscous oil. The most important
asphalt deposit is the Pitch Lake of Trinidad which
has been dug for over a century though only a frac-
tion of its 87 metres (285 feet) depth has so far been
removed. It is an excellent material for road surfac-
ing. Large quantities of this natural asphalt are dug
up, melted into barrels and exported.
Oil prospecting and drilling
The modern oil industry began in 1859 when the first
oil well was sunk by Edwin Laurentine Drake in
Titusville, N.W. Pennsylvania. Today the number of
oil wells in the world must be well over 700 000 and
the annual oil output more than 3 000 million
tonnes.
In the early days of oil prospecting, fortune-seek-
ers merely drilled randomly called ('wild-catting')
hoping to strike oil. They had practically no knowl-
Fil.27.5 Sketch of an oil tanker
radar.scanner
slop tanks
oil fuel in winqs
bunker
27.8 Oil derricks in the Texas oilfields Servizio Editoriale
Fotografico
edge of the mode of oil occurrence and if they did
find oil, it was pure luck! But modern oil prospecting
is a very technical job that requires modern, scien-
tific equipment. A detailed survey of the geological
structure of the area is carried out first and precise
instruments that can register the density, permea-
bility and complexity of the rocks beneath are used.
It is then possible to draw a fairly accurate sketch of
the subterranean structural pattern before drilling is
recommended. Modern oil wells are sunk to a depth
of between a few hundred and 6 700 metres (22,000
feet). To drill a well of average depth can cost as
much as M$1 000 000! So unless there is a fair
chance of striking oil, it is a terrific waste of money
to attempt 'wild-catting'. Once a drilling site is
decided, a steel derrick about 30 metres (100 feet)
high will be erected and equipment for drilling
brought in (Plate 27.8 and Fig.27.4). Steel tubes
are inserted in the bore-hole and, once the drill
load ing/discharge
pipelines
cargo tanks
bunkers
boiler &
engine
water
ballast
tank

reaches the oil-bearing strata, oil gushes out through
the bore-hole and keeps 'flowing' for weeks or even
years. When it ceases to flow naturally, it is pumped
to the surface.
Oil transportation. The cheapest and the most effi-
cient method of transporting crude oil overland for
great distances is by pipelines which may be 610 mm
(24 inches) or 945 mm (36 inches) in diameter. This
involves the construction of pumping stations at
intervals and the installation of pipes, hundreds or
thousands of kilometres long. The initial cost may
be high, but in the long run, it is very economical.
It saves time, money and labour and the operation
is very simple. In this manner crude oil can be car-
ried by pipelines direct to the refineries or to export-
ing ports for filling oil tankers that transport the oil
to distant countries. For local use, oil trucks and rail-
wagons are used for the conveyance of refined petro-
leum products. For military and emergency require-
ments, barrels of oil are sometimes transported by
aircraft. For sea transport, oil tankers which are
often extremely large, are used (Fig.27.5).
Oil Refining
1. Location of refineries. Oil refineries may be
located:
(a) In or near the oilfields. This is a temporary
measure and applies only to small refineries. As oil-
fields are often located in remote or desert regions,
there is little industrial demand for the refined prod-
ucts and they are not likely to be good locations for
refineries.
Fig.27.6 A fractional distillation plant
Bubble cap
-+
(b) At the port of export. Examples are the refi-
neries in the Persian Gulf area, e.g. Abadan which
serve local needs and protect the interests of the oil-
producing countries. They provide ernployment for
local people but industrial demand is not very high.
(c) At the port of import. Refineries, as in Sou-
thampton, Yokohama, Singapore, Port Dickson, are
normally owned by large international firms that
have world-wide oil interests. It is cheaper to import
crude oil and refine it locally for domestic and indus-
trial use than to import refined products.
2. The distillation of oil. Mineral oils are made up
of different hydrocarbons. Crude petroleum has lit-
tle use unless it is refined, by a process known as
distillation. In distillation, the mechanism is simply
to split the oil into its various 'groups' of hydrocar-
bons or 'fractions' at very high temperatures. As
each fraction boils at a different temperature, the
various groups of hydrocarbons can be extracted at
their own boiling points. The lighter fractions such
as petrol, paraffin or kerosene and benzene will be
evaporated and condensed first at temperatures
probably below 38 'C (100 'F). The heavier fractions
such as diesel, lubricating and fuel oils will condense
later at temperatures between 38.C and 427 "C
(100 "F and 800 "F). At the end of the line is the
residue comprising the heaviest fuel oils as well as
vaseline, wax, and asphalt. The process of distilling
oils by fractions is referred to as fractional distilla-
tion (Fig. 27.6).
Fractional distillation is one of the oldest and most
universal forms of oil refining, but of the total oil
Condenser
Gas separator
Refinery gas
Petrol
1 10'C
Naptha
for chemicals
lgooc
Kerosene
2600C
Diesel oils
Fractionating
column
340"C
Crucle oil
Bitumen

Petrol for cars
ffi
DIESELOILS +
lubricating oil
='-=-:
f:a: 
I 
-
{=.---3 fchemicals
\i 
-,
Bo,n,'rn* @oorirr*,
FUEL OILS
BITUMEN -+
Fig.27.7 Oil products and their uses

distilled, the motor fuel fraction is only 15 per cent.
With the rapid rise of the automobile industry, which
demands enormous quantities of the lighter oils such
as petrol or gasoline, it has been found necessary to
adopt the thermal cracking process in which the
heavier fractions are heated to much higher temper-
atures until they break down or 'crack' into the
lighter fractions such as petrol. In recent years,
oil chemists have found that by adding a catalyst
such as powdered platinum, to speed up the
cracking process, more and better motor fuels
can be extracted. This is the catalytic cracking
process.
The uses of oil
The many uses of oil may best be grouped under
four categories.
l. As an indispensable motor fuel. This is the great-
est use of oil, 'the servant of the automobile age'.
As petrol and diesel oil, petroleum drives all the
motor vehicles and aircraft of the world as weli as
a large proportion of trains and ships. The modern
communication complex would simply break down
if petroleum were exhausted. At the rate that the
hundreds of millions of automobiles consume petro-
leum daily, scientists will have to find a substitute
for oil in the future.
2. As a lubricant. Petroleum in the form of grease
and lubricant is absolutely essential in lubricating
machine parts to reduce friction to the minimum.
Our 'machine age' with its high-speed machines
would grind to a standstill if lubricants were not
available.
3. As a vital source of power. Vast amounts of min-
eral oil are being burnt daily in heaters, boilers and
furnaces to provide power in factories and to gen-
erate thermal electricity. Its great calorific capacity
and its convenience for handling and transporting has
made petroleum the most extensively used fuel.
4. The many uses of its by-products. Kerosene has
long been a domestic fuel for cooking, lighting and
heating. Bitumen or asphalt is used for roofing,
road-surfacing and water-proofing purposes. Paraf-
fin and wax are used as illuminants and lubricants
and for the manufacture of candles, seals and
polishes. Its various'by-products form the basic raw
materials of a host of industrial items such as plas-
tics, synthetic rubber, detergents, insecticides, and
pharmaceutical and organic chemical products such
as drugs, varnishes, solvents, diluents (Fig. 27.7).
World oil production and distribution
About 60 per cent of the world's oil reserves are
estimated to be in the Middle East. The present
major oil producing countries in 1977 are the
U.S.S.R. (l8Vo of the world total), Saudi Arabia
(l6Vo), the U.S.A. (l3Vo) and Iran (9.5Vo).In the
U.S.S.R., the oldest oilfields are lochted in the Cau-
casus region of which the Baku fields are the most
productive. Fresh sources have been discovered be-
tween the Volga and the Urals and have surpassed
the outtput of Baku. Other very new sources are
found around the Caspian Sea and Russian Turkes-
tan, as well as in Siberia. In the U.S.A., oil comes
mainly from the Mid-Continent states of Kansas,
Oklahoma, Texas and the Gulf Coast region of
southern Arkansas, Louisiana and Mississippi. The
rest of the American output comes from California,
the Rocky Mountains and the older, now almost ex-
hausted fields in the Appalachians.
Venezuela now accounts for only 4 per cent of
world oil output. Oil is found around Lake Mara-
caibo and the Orinoco basin. Some of the crude oil
is sent to the nearby Dutch islands of Aruba and
Curacao in the Caribbean to be refined, some is
refined locally and the rest is exported as crude oil.
Amongst the Middle East producers, Saudi Ara-
bia is the greatest (16 per cent) mainly from the
Dharan oilfields opposite the oil-rich island of Bah-
rain. Next comes Iran (9.5 per cent) where the oil-
fields are at Masjid-i-Sulaiman at the foot of the
Zagros Mountains. The refinery at Abadan is one of
the largest in the world. Iraq accounts for 4 per cent
of the world production. The pipelines from the oil-
fields of Kirkuk and Mosul run across the deserts to
the tanker teminals at Tripoli in Lebanon and Banias
in Syria. Another oil-rich state is Kuwait (3 per cent)
where the bulk of the oil comes from the Burgan
oilfields. The North African countries of Libya (3
per cent), Algeria (2 per cent), the West African
country of Nigeria (3 per cent) and the United Arab
Emirates (3 per cent) are also important producers.
'I'he rest of the world contributes the remaining 25
per cent. This includes the Canadian oilfields in the
Prairie provinces, the Indonesian fields in Sumatra
and Borneo, and fields in Brunei and Mexico. Now-
adays, oil can also be obtained from bituminous
shales, sands and coal, but due to the high cost of
distillation, such new sources of oil cannot be
expected to be operated on a large scale. Figs. 27.8
shows the major oilfields of the world, andFig. 27.9
the major producers.

{
Scale 1: 215 000 000
Fig.27.8 The chief oilfields of the world
o6101520263035%
Fig. 27.9(a) The major oil producers of the world.
Fig. 27.9(b) Major producers of natural gas of the
(% of world total) UN Statistical Year Book, 1977
ELECTRICITY
Of the power resources, electricity is the cheapest.
It is not exhaustable like coal or petroleum but is
renewable. The French have aptly described it as
'white coal' . There are two different sources of elec-
tricity. That which is derived from water sources
(streams, glaciers, natural waterfalls or man-made
dams) by hydro-turbines is referred to as hydro-elec-
tricity. When it is derived from generators driven by
steam-turbines by burning coal, oil or natural gas,
it is called thermal electricity. The former is best
developed in the mountainous regions of temperate
latitudes where precipitation is adequate and there
are ideal sites for the location of hydro-electric
power stations. The latter is widely scattered all over
the world wherever mineral fuels are available for
burning in the thermal:power stations. It is thus best
developed in industrial districts and near coalfields.
Large quantities of water are also necessary for cool-
ing purposes in thermal plants.
Uses and advantages
In regions where coal and other mineral fuels are
absent, electricity compensates for their deficien-
cies. In Switzerland hydro-electric power is the chief
source of motive power. Watches, machinery, pre-
cision instruments and electrical appliances are pro-
world
%30
iq{ev.:Ei
q?Erji:E
)qEo
-;E-Ei5c:
z7
U. Arcb Emlrltrr

duced for export. All Swiss trains were electrified by
1961. There are a number of industries that can only
be successfully undertaken with a very cheap supply
of H.E.P., e.g. the electro-chemicals industries,
especially the smelting of aluminium (from bauxite),
and the production of nitrates and calcium carbides.
This explains why countries like Norway, Sweden,
Canada and Japan which are deficient in mineral
fuels are yet able to attain such a high level of tech-
nical and industrial development.
There are a number of advantages of electricity
over other forms of energy.
l. Its cleanliness. Unlike coal, electricity does not
give out smoke and it is never dirty. It can be con-
veniently used in kitchens, furnaces, and radiators
for heating and is without ashes or residue. In fac-
tories, offices and homes, a flick of the finger brings
light in darkness almost instantly. It preserves food
in refrigerators or deep-freezers. It is difficult to
imagine what would happen if there were a power
failure in the world for just a few hours!
2. Its unlimited degree of divisibility. By the use
of simple mechanical devices such as transformers,
electrical energy can be adjusted from a fraction of
a watt to thousands of watts per hour. It is thus
indispensable in modern complex manufactures
where the control of speed in machines or in fur-
naces is precise to a fraction of a second.
3. Convenient translort. Unlike coal or petroleum,
electricity needs neither trucks nor pipes. By means
Fig. 27.10 A hydro-electric power station where electricity
is generated and distributed
of only wires and plugs, electric energy can be trans-
ported to consuming points over great distances and
with the greatest ease. With the use of large under-
sea cables, Sweden is able to 'export' electricity
across the Sound to Denmark. Very high voltage
cables are now used to transmit electricity for dis-
tances over I 600 km (1,000 miles) with negligible
loss in energy.
Basic requirements for hydro-electricity
development.
For successful H.E.P. development, the following
factors are essential.
l. A steep gradient or slope. This enables rivers
or streams to plunge down swiftly to fiffn the hydro-
turbines that generate hydro-electricity. Natural rap-
ids and waterfalls are especially advantageous. The
regions with the greatest H.E.P. development are
those with the strongest relief: Scandinavia, Alpine
Europe, Scotland, Canada, the U.S.A. (Appalachi-
ans and Rockies), Japan and New Zealand
(Fig. 27.11).
2. A sufficient and constant volume of water. Regions
with a heavy precipitation from either rain or snow
throughout the year are ideal for generating H.E.P.
Large dams, made possible by the invention of spe-
cial types of cement, and the development of hydro-
turbines and electrical dynamos enable large-scale
hydro-electric schemes to be established. The arti-
ficial lakes, created by the erection of dams, hold
llirtl
ERATT ON 
-I<-TRANSM1SS; 
Oru # 
DtSTRt BUTTON
o
o
oo
o
o
E!o

water for use during periods of low precipitation. In
the colder north, the freezing of rivers limits power
generation.
3. Heavy capital outlay. Modern multi-purpose
schemes need a very large capital outlay. The initial
cost of erecting a dam is so great that it is normally
undertaken by the government, but the expenditure
is worthwhile because the scheme may have a mul-
tiplicity of uses including H.E.P. generation, irriga-
tion, flood-control and navigation. Once the dam is
completed, its maintenance costs, in comparison
with those of a thermal power station, are much less.
4. A large domestic and industrial market. For a
dam to be worth constructing, there must be a fairly
large market to make use of the H.E.P. generated.
The cost of installing power plants, transforming sta-
tions, storage reserves and transmission lines is so
great that a reasonable market must first be assured.
The growth and decline of the market for both
domestic and industrial uses will directly affect the
profits made by the hydro-power stations. The high
demand for cheap and abundant electricity by indus-
trial Japan led to the expansion of H.E.P. devel-
opment all over the country. Fig. 27.10 shows a
sketch of a hydro-electric plant where electricity is
generated and distributed.
Fig.27.11 World major hydro-electric power schemes
Fig. 27.12 The world's chief producers of electricity (H.E.P.
and T.E.P. combined) UN Statistical Year Book, 1977
World production and distribution of electricity.
Over two-thirds of the world's electricity supply
comes from thermal plants, mainly from the indus-
trial areas. Fig. 27 .I1, shows the world production of
hydro-electric power. The United States alone
accounts for 3l%o of the world's annual electricity
output, followed by the U.S.S.R., the United King-
dom, East and West Germany, France and Japan
(Fis. 27.r2).
As for hydro-electric power, it makes up only
about a third of the world's electricity supply. The
./1 
- 
BOOUCHAN
Il 
a 
.
(fo!6'+q "on 
... i
/ 
oNtEPRosIRol 
. IRKUTSK
ALP3|5 .i&
$\6To "05'o". ^'U
{ 
*.*,iu" i'/."** 
";of 
u-."
NI+
I
I
I
scale 1 : 215 0OO OOO
. Major hydro-electric power schemes ( SELECTED DAMS NAMED )

Africa
Australia
S, America
Asia
Europe
: 
developed
N. 
Iiii:,i$;::':::l rnrater power
nmericaNl poteniial
- 
vEter povrcr
20 30
Fig.27.13 Potential and developed water power on a con-
tinental basis
ternperate lands of Europe and North America
have, in fact, the greatest output of developed water
power. In terms of individual countries, the United
States is the greatest, producing 23 per cent of the
world's H.E.P. Next is Canada, 15 per cent and third
Japan, 14 per cent. The other producers in order of
importance are France, Sweden, Norway, the
U.S.S.R. and Switzerland. Fig. 27.13 gives a com-
parative representation of their output.
As the world's output of developed hydro-power
differs so significantly from the tropics to the tem-
perate lands, it is best to consider world distribution
on a continental basis.
1. North America. The United States and Canada
together account for about one-third of the world's
total developed H.E.P. They have some of the
world's best known dams. The Grand Coulee Dam
in Washington state is the world's largest concrete
dam, 183 metres (600 feet) above river-level, and is
multi-purpose. The Hoover or Boulder Dam of
Arizona is 222 metres (727 feet) high, the highest in
the world. It controls the River Colorado, supplying
water and electricity to western U.S.A., includ-
ing Los Angeles and San Francisco where prodigious
quantities are needed every day. The dam holds
back the huge Lake Mead, which is like an inland
sea (Plate 9.D page 87). The St. Lawrence Seaway
Scheme is for both electricity and navigation. The
Kitimat Scheme in British Columbia was constructed
to supply H.E.P. for aluminium smelting industries
at Kitimat, with much of the imported bauxite com-
ing from Jamaica. Under the Tennessee Valley
Authority (T.V.A.), more than 30 multi-purpose
dams have been constructed across many rivers to
rehabilitate a vast devastated area as big as the
whole of Peninsular Malaysia.
2. Europe. Europe ranks second in the world's total
H.E.P. output. It is best developed in countries lack-
ing in coal and where the relief is rugged. Most of
the annual H.E.P. production comes from only six
countries: Italy, France, Norway, Sweden, West
Germany and Switzerland. Norway, with neither
coal nor oil, has fully developed its potential water
power resources for industrial and domestic use. She
has in fact, the highest per capita output of water
power in the world. Sweden's chemical and metal-
lurgical industries are based on 'white coal' and her
rich deposits of iron ore. The swift glacially-fed
streams of the Alps, the Apennines, and the Pyre-
nees are all vital to the development of the industries
of their respective countries: Switzerland, Italy and
France. In the U.S.S.R., the Dnieprostroi Dam on
the Dnieper River is one of the largest dams in the
world, and the country is rapidly expanding its elec-
tricity production with new dams such as those at
Bratsk and Krasnoyarsk in Siberia.
3. Australia and New Zealand. Together they
account for less than 2 per cent of the world's devel-
oped water power resources. The multi-purpose
Snowy River Scheme of south-east Australia is the
largest in Australasia and there are a number of
smaller ones.
4. Asia. Almost a third of the world's potential
water power capacity is found in Asia, but in terms
of developed H.E.P., it is not so important, pro-
ducing about a quarter of the European output.
Japan alone has developed more water power than
all the other Asian countries combined and accounts
for 14 per cent of the world total output. China has
made remarkable progress in the last few decades,
while Indo-Pakistan has many comprehensive
schemes to meet the urgent needs for domestic light-
ing, irrigated farming and flood control. In Peninsu-
lar Malaysia, the Chenderoh and the Temenggor
Dams on Sungai Perak supply most of the power
requirements for the local tin and rubber industries.
The recently completed Abu Bakar Dam in the
Cameron Highlands supplies the H.E.P. require-
ments of central Peninsular Malaysia, particularly in
conjunction with ambitious rural development pro-
grammes.
5. Africa. Despite its vast potential water power
resources, Africa's developed H.E.P. is about 1 per
cent of the world total. A number of dams have how-
ever been built holding back some of the largest
man-made lakes in the world. These include the
Aswan Dam of Egypt, Akosombo Dam of Ghana,
Sennar Dam of Sudan, the Kariba Dam on the Zam-
besi, and those at the foot of the Owen Falls
11<

(Uganda) and Victoria Falls (Zimbabwe).
6. South America. It has little-developed power
resources, though the potential is good. There are
good natural conditions for the siting of power sta-
tions in Brazil. Chile. Venezuela and the countries
1.
within the Andean Cordillera. The presence of oil
has prevented the intensification of efforts in devel-
oping the water power resources of some of these
countries.
2.
J.
Ouestions and Exercises
5.
(a) Name one major area in Europe and another area in Asia where coal is extensively mined.
(b) What important industries made use of this coal as a fuel or a raw material for their manufacturing
industries?
(c) What problems are encountered by these coal mining areas to-day?
Either: Compare the merits and limitations of oil transport by pipelines and tankers
Or : Explain why the largest oil refineries have a seaboard location.
Make a comparative study of the generation of electricity by hydro power stations and thermal power
plants under these headings:
(a) constructional cost;
(b) maintenance costs;
(c) transmission costs;
(d) labour costs.
Write explanatory accounts of any three of the following:
(a) Many large industrial areas in Europe are located at or near the coalfields;
(b) Natural gas has become an increasingly important domestic and industrial fuel;
(c) The bulk of the world's electricity comes from thermal power stations;
(d) Estimates of the world's oil reserves are never very reliable.
Coal, petroleum and electricity are three major forms of power. For any one of them:
(a) locate their major areas of production on the world map;
(b) state the geographical factors that assist their exploitation;
(c) state their chief uses.
Sample Objective Ouestions
1. Mining is a 'robber industry' and a
mining area can be easily exhausted.
Care therefore has to be taken to
conserve mineral resources as they
are irreplaceable. Of the following
suggested mineral conservation mea-
sures which one is /east helpful? 
3.
A Avoid wasteful use of minerals
B Improve techniques of mining
C Increase the wages of miners
D Utilize substitute materials
2. When coal seams are contorted and
deep-seated in the ground, it can be
expected that
A the quality of coal will be poor
B the cost of extractions will be
high
C mining will be relatively easy
D other minerals will be present
Electricity is preferred to coal as a
source of fuel in modern industries
for these reasons excepl
A It leaves behind neither smoke
nor soot
B It has a higher calorific value
C It can be more economically
transported
D It yields by-products for the che-
micals industry
4. China has often been referred to as
'a beggar with a golden bowl'. This
implies that
A China has rich gold deposits
B much of the country's mineral de-
posits are still untouchedd
C Chinese beggars beg for gold in
the streets
D the Chinese have their food in
bowls made of gold
5. Coal normally occurs in
A alluvial deposits
B cracks and crevices of rocks
C seams between rock strara
D lodes deep below the earth
4.

6. Which of the following factors have
to be considered before an area can
be mined?
I the size of the ore dePosit
II the metallic content of the ore
III the specific gravity of the miner-
al
IV the demand for the metal
V its degree of resistance to ero-
slon
VI its mode of occurrence
VII the availability of a transport
network
A All, except II and VI
B All, except III and IV
C All, except V and VI
D All, except III and V
7. The following lists the different
types of coal. Which list gives the
coal type in an increasing order of
carbon content?
A peat, lignite, bituminous, anthra-
cite
B lignite, peat, anthracite. bitumi-
nous
C bituminous. anthracite, peat, lig-
nite
D anthracite, bituminous, lignite,
peat
8. In modern industries the use of coal
as a fuel has declined sharply in
popularity mainly because
A it is not easily available
B it is very expensive fuel
C it does not yield any industrial
by-products
D other alternate fuels are more
efficient
9. Which of the following is not a ma-
jor use of coal?
A generatingelectricity
B raising steam power
C fuelling rockets into space
D the manufacture of chemical pro-
ducts
Most of Canada's oil is drilled
A on the shores of the Hudson Bay
B in the North-west Territory
C around the St. Lawrence-Great
Lakes region
D in the Alberta province
The most convenient and economic-
al way of bulk transportation of oil
in most places is by
A pipelines
B tankers
C oil trucks
D tank wagons
The greatest quantity of crude oil is
transported between
A Nigeria and 
Mediterranean
Europe
B the Middle East and Westerri
Europe
C the Persian Gulf and the U.S.A.
D Venezuela and the Far East
The increase in oil piices around the
world has resulted in the following
except
A higher prices for manufactured
goods
B greater wealth for the oil nations
C world wide inflation
D increased international goodwill
Thermal electricity generating plants
are mainly located
A in regions of strong relief
B in densely populated urban dis-
tncts
C where the annual rainfall is heavy
and well distributed
D away from metropolitan areas to
minimize air pollution
Apart from hydro-electric power,
another important source of energy
in the North Island of New Zealand
is
A nuclear power
B geothermal power
C solar energy
D power harnessed from the rising
tides
16. Of the following statements of com-
parison between hydro and thermal
electricity, which one is least accepr
able?
A The world consumes more hydro
than thermal electricity.
B The output capacity of a hydro
plant is greater than a thermal
plant
C It costs more to maintain a ther-
mal plant than a hydro plant
D Thermal plants are more labour
intensive than hydro plants
17. Of the following types of coal which
is most extensively used in indus-
tries?
A peat
B lignite
C bituminous
D anthracite
18. The quality and price of coal are de-
pendent on the following factors
except
A its carbon content
B its specific gravity
C the amount of moisture present
D the amount of impurities present
19. Oil tankers today are increasing in
size because
A there is no risk in fire
B they sail the high seas
C they can carry other cargoes
besides oil
D it has a lower operation cost per
unit of oil transported
20. The greatest advantage of hydro-
electricity over other fuels is that
A it is free
B it is inexhaustible
C it can be transported across
national frontiers
D it can be generated anyrrhere.
10.
n.
t2.
13.
t4

