Chapter 26 Agriculture
The Basic lmportance of Agriculture
Agriculture is by far the most widespread form of
human activity and it is more basic than any indus-
try. Even in this 'machine age', agriculture of one
kind or another provides a livelihood for more than
three-quarters of the human race. It yields fibres and
raw materials for the factories on which a large por-
tion of the remaining people depend. From the crops
the farmer grows, he gets his food and also that of
his family. The surplus is sold for cash, with which
he buys the other necessities of life, be it canned sar-
dines from the United State, linen sheets from Bel-
gium or an electric cooker from Japan. The peasants
around the world produce a wide range of agricul-
tural commodities for the world market, to be
traded, processed and even returned to them in a
different form, Without agriculture, many factories
would close, and, despite all the wonders that sci-
ence has brought, a world without food would be a
dead world.
Another vital feature of agriculture is its perma-
nency. Minerals, continuously mined, are sure to be
exhausted one day but this is not the case with
agriculture. Crops have been raised since the earliest
times and they are still being grown. The soil, care-
fully maintained, is a flow resource that is renewable,
and can even be improved. Crop yields have been
increased many times to meet the demands of the
swelling population. Though man cannot overcome
all the limitations his environment imposes upon
him, he can always attempt to modify it to suit his
convenience. In this manner of gradual adaptation,
man has brought about many changes. The types of
crops grown and the methods of farming employed
have been significantly modified.
Factors Influencing Agriculture
Several factors affect the types of crop cultivated
and the methods of cultivating them.
l. Climate. This is by far the greatest deciding fac-
tor. It is entirely a question of climate when apples
fail to mature in Malaysia or cotton cannot be grown
in Lancashire. The climatic requirements are so
exacting for some crops that they are found naturally
only in certain climatic zones. Human interference
in modifying the environment by such means as
irrigation, the use of greenhouses or scientific plant
breeding may extend their area of cultivation, but
this may increase cost or it may only be successful
to a certain limit beyond which the climatic barrier
may be so great that there is no alternative to
importing the crop.
Amongst the climatic requirements, moisture in
the form of rainfall is most vital. But for different
crops the amount, intensity, distribution and inci-
dence of the rainfall required varies. For example,
rice requires at least 1 520 mm (60 inches) of annual
rainfall, well distributed throughout the year, with
the heaviest rainfall during the growing season and
comparatively little rain during the harvesting
period,
Besides moisture, the heat or temperature factor
must also be considered. The mean annual temper.
ature, the temperature during the growth season, the
frost-free period and the rate ofevaporation, all con-
tribute to the final yield of the crop. For instance,
cotton's optimal climatic requirements are: a mod-
erately high temperature (about 24'C175 "F) during
the six months growing period, ample sunlight in
between showers and 200 frost-free days. Other fac-
tors such as wind, fog, mists and ocean currents are
much less significant, but nevertheless operate in
their own local context. The occurrence of floods or
droughts can be disastrous to the farmer.
2. Relief. The lowlands are the most suited to a
wide range of crops such as wheat, coconuts, rubber,
sugar-cane and padi and an increase in altitude will
exclude most of them. Rubber's latex yield dimin-
ishes appreciably above the 760-metre (2,500-foot)
contour. Other crops like tea and coffee thrive best
on elevated ground. The well-drained hill slopes of
the Assam Hills and the Brazilian Highlands are the
homes of the world's largest tea gardens and coffee
plantations respectively. Jute likes swampy deltas
and coconuts grow best where they are near sea
breezes. Dates can only be successfully grown in a
lowland arid environment. Terrace-farming is, in
fact, one way of providing lowland-flooded-field
conditions on tropical hill slopes.
3. Soil. Soil which forms the physical support of

plants is fundamental to any form of agriculture.
Soils in different parts of the globe vary tremen-
dously in their structure, composition and fertility.
Weathering processes produce soils of varying min-
eral composition so that soils contain varied amounts
of iron, aluminium, calcium, potash and silica which
affect their fertility. Soil fertility is further influenced
by the presence or absence of organic matter or
humus, which is derived from the decay of leaves,
plants, roots and living organisms. Soils rich in
humus give heavy yields of crops, but need to be
replenished when they become exhausted. The use
of manure and fertilizers replaces the mineral and
organic matter that is used by growing crops and
maintains soil fertility.
A close examination of soils will show that they
have quite different structures, much depending on
the size of the soil particles and the presence of 'col-
loids'which bind the soil together and determine the
size of the pore spaces between lumps of soil,
through which air and water circulate. Sandy soils,
which have coarse particles and are relatively lacking
in colloids, allow water and air to run through
quickly and are suitable for crops like groundnuts
which require much aeration. On the other hand,
clayey soils comprise very fine particles and are very
tightly bound together by colloids, becoming sticky
and highly moisture-retentive. They are thus well-
suited to rice cultivation. Loamy soils possess inter-
mediate properties between those of sand and clay
and are most useful for agricultural purposes.
Ploughing, manuring, drainage and irrigation are the
various methods that farmers employ to improve the
structure, porosity, aeration and fertility of the soil.
4. Biotic factors. Despite all the natural conditions
of climate, relief and soil that may favour crop cul-
tivation, the presence of biotic agents such as weeds,
parasitic plants, diseases and insect-pests will dam-
age crops and hamper farming in many parts of the
world. Weeds like lalang in the tropics and creeping
thistle, which propagate rapidly and are difficult to
eliminate, invade farm clearings and destroy crops
or compete with the sown plants for food. Farmers
resort to various means of eliminating or reducing
them, such as hand-weeding, hoeing, ploughing,
crop rotation, improved drainage or the application
of chemical weed-killers.
Many fungus diseases and insect pests do great
damage to crops. The boll-weevil is a dreaded pest
in the Cotton Belt of the U.S.A. and has completely
annihilated the Sea Island species of cotton in south-
eastern U.S.A. since the 1890s. The Coffee Blishts
of Sri Lanka destroyed practically all the coffee trees
in the Central Highlands in 1878 and farmers had to
turn to tea growing instead. Even greater havoc was
created by the fungus parasite Phytophthora infes-
tans in lreland between 1845 and 1848. It attacked
the potatoes and caused the Potato Famine which
drove many Irish farmers to leave their homes and
migrate to England and the United States of Amer-
ica. Millions of hectares of vineyards in the U.S.A.
(California) and Mediterranean Europe (especially
France) were destroyed in the 1870s by an insect pest
Phylloxera which bored through the roots of the vine
plants and destroyed them. The Monilia disease and
the Witches' broom disease plagued the cocoa
(cacao) industry of Ecuador in the early twentieth
century. The temperate wheat lands often suffer
from attacks by Smut and Bunt fungi and rust dis-
ease. In Monsoon Asia, the padi fields are not
immune to attack. Insect pests like the pianggiang
/y as well as birds and animals such as rats, help to
reduce the padi yield. In Africa, the locust swarms
which eat up every leaf and blade of grass are
dreaded by all, while in many areas cattle rearing is
almost impossible because of the prevalence of the
tsetse fly which spreads disease to the animals.
Preventive measures against fungus diseases and
insect pests include hand-picking, destruction of dis-
eased stock and the spraying of selected insecticides
and fungicides, e.g. D.D.T. Regular inspection and
care are very necessary if farm crops are to be kept
healthy and free from pests and diseases.
5. Economic factors. Apart from the physical and
biotic factors that affect farming, one must not for-
get that economic factors are also extremely impor-
tant in modern agriculture which has become very
competitive. The cost of running a farm involves
much expenses which have to be met by the sale of
the crops either locally or by export overseas. Land
values are becoming very high especially where
agricultural land use is in competition with industrial
and urban use in the developed countries. The cost
of purchase or rental of the farm land can be con-
siderable. There are also maintenance costs all round
the year besides other recurring expenses such as the
purchase of seeds, fertilizers, insecticides and feed-
stuffs for the animals. In order to keep the farm
highly productive the farmer may have to buy or hire
machinery to run his farm and meet the costs of serv-
icing, repairing and replacing equipment. There are
also many other expenses that a farmer may have to
meet, including marketing expenses (freight chargds
including insurance for export crops), storage costs,

government taxes, the provision of farm vehicles,
building of greenhouses, installation of drainage and
irrigation facilities, charges for meteorological or
veterinary services, etc. If the farmer is to make any
substantial profit from his farm, he has to run his
farm in the most economic and efficient terms.
6. Other factors. Farming practices are everywhere
determined by local conditions such as the type of
farm ownership and land inheritance, social and
religious influences, the availability of farm hands,
the efficiency of transport network and fluctuating
demand for various crops. Some of these factors can
perhaps be best shown in an example. In India crop
yields are low because most farms are small as they
have been subdivided for generations into tiny plots
and are unable to take advantage of the economies
of large-scale farming as practised in Canada, the
U.S.A. and the U.S.S.R. Agricultural indebted.ness,
due to exploitation by landlords and inherited pov-
erty, makes the lives of farmers a real misery. Unless
the government can offer effective assistance, most
farmers are too poor to maintain or improve the fer-
tility of their over-used soils. Lack of fertilizers, farm
machinery, high quality seeds and effective insecti-
cides, result in low yields and meagre profits for the
farmers. The Hindus' traditional veneration of cattle
and the non-consumption of beef hinder the com-
merical development of the cattle industry. Though
India has 15 per cent. of the world's cattle popula-
tion, she has no beef or milk or dairy products for
export. On the other hand, countries like Argentina,
Australia, New Zealand, Denmark and the Neth-
erlands, which have only a fraction of India's cattle
population, capitalize on the animals as a major
export item in many forms: frozen, chilled and
corned beef; evaporated and condensed milk; but-
ter, cheese and cream. Social prejudices and wide-
spread illiteracy makes technological changes
difficult. India's agricultural economy is ruled by
the monsoons and beset with frequent climatic haz-
ards like droughts and floods which make farming
a very insecure means of livelihood. Agricultural
practices around the world are very varied and one
must always take into consideration local factors that
may hinder or assist agricultural development.
Soil Erosion and lmpoverishment
Soil is fundamental to all agricultural practices and
great care has to be taken to ensure that it is not
misused or destroyed. Under natural conditions, soil
fertility is replenished by such processes as leaf-fall,
organic decomposition and animal decay. But with
the interference of Man in ploughing up earth and
removing the crops that are harvested, this natural
balance is upset. Any form of farming is bound to
affect the soil in some way. Apart from the normal
erosion of the earth's surface by such sculpturing
agents as running water, wind, rain, ice, frost and
waves (as described in Chapters 2-11), human igno-
rance and mismanagement in soil use greatly acceler-
ate this erosional process. Unsound farming practices
around the world have already led to very acute
problems of soil erosion in many countries. In some
cases the soil (especially the fertile top layer) has
been completely eroded away and is beyond replace-
ment. In other instances, cultivation has resulted in
the deterioration of the mineral and organic content
of the soil. This process is known as soil impoverish-
ment. Though the soil is still physically present, it is
highly deficient in plant nutrients and gives very low
yields. Many unsound farming practices lead to the
twin evils of soil erosion and soil impoverishment.
Some of these are described below:
1. Overcropping. If too many crops are grown on
the same land year after year without adequate
replacement of the plant nutrients, the soil is bound
to suffer. Yields will deteriorate until it is no longer
economic to use the land. Monoculture, i.e. the
practice of growing the same crop year after year,
such as rice in Monsoon Asia or cotton in the Cotton
Belt of southern U.S.A. exhausts those minerals
which are vital to the plants and these have to be
replaced by suitable manures or fertilizers. Multi-
cropping, as practised in many parts of Japan and
China, where far too many crops are planted in a
year in the same farm without giving the land a
chance to rest, will also lead to soil impoverishment.
2. Overgrazing. In many parts of the world, espe-
cially in Africa, India and Mediterranean Europe,
farmers keep too many domestic animals such as cat-
tle, sheep or goats, on their pasture lands. If the car-
rying capacity of the land is exceeded, the grass
cannot re-establish itself so that the land is denuded
of vegetation and exposed to rain and wind. Under
these conditions acute soil erosion can take place.
3. Slopewise cultivation. It is easier to plough up
and down a slope than to follow the contours and
thus many farmers grow their crops slopewise. After
rain, water runs off down the furrows which form
ready-made channels. Loose soil is carried down the
hill and erosion is accelerated by the force of gravity,
so that the channels are deepened and widened to
form gullies (Fig. 26.1). Many early settlers in the

Fig. 26.1 Slopewise cultivation deepens channels and leads
to gully erosion.
U.S.A. practised slopewise cultivation and as a
result large tracts of sloping farmland have been dev-
astated by gully-erosion.
4. Deforestation. When natural forests are cleared
for lumbering or farming, without immediate
replanting of new trees, the bare soil is exposed to
rain and wind erosion. In conditions of heavy rain
the water is no longer intercepted by the leaves and
branches, nor absorbed by the tree-roots but flows
off the slopes as a sheet of water causing sheet-ero-
sion. The fertile top-soil is removed but is usually
deposited at the bottom of the slope, often in stream
or river beds. When this happens the rivers are made
shallower by the material on their beds and conse-
quently flood more easily since they cannot cope
with heavy run-offs. These problems are being
experienced in many developing countries where
forest removal is not matched by timely replanting.
5. Shifting cultivation. The aboriginal tribes of
many tropical countries practise 'slash-and-burn' or
shifting cultivation. They clear small plots by fire
which destroy the original forest, leaving the barren
surfaces to be acted on by the erosional forces of
nature. Heavy tropical downpours carry off much of
the top soil causing widespread sheet erosion.
Though the initial harvests from the cleared
'ladangs' are satisfactory, since the virgin land con-
tains much humus and ashes, yields soon dwindle
and after a few years the 'ladangs' are abandoned.
If left untilled for many years a secondary forest
cover grows up and soil fertility is gradually re-estab-
lished, but if the fallow period is only for a few years,
the land cannot regain minerals and humus and is
permanently impoverished. The degraded soil may
also be more readily eroded if it lacks humus, which
helps to bind the soil particles together.
Soil Gonservation and Sound Farming
Techniques
Sound farming techniques must be employed to pre-
vent soil erosion and impoverishment, and to ensure
that agriculture is more profitable to the farmer and
provides better crops for the consumers. The follow-
ing are some of the more important practices:
l. Crop rotation. Both monoculture and over-
intensive multicropping are unsatisfactory because
they exhaust the soil. Crop rotation however allows
a wide range of crops to be grown without allowing
the field to lie fallow but without depleting the soil.
By growing different crops in successive years in the
same field, plant nutrients used by one crop can be
replaced by another. For example, potatoes require
much potash but do not exhaust nitrates. Thus they
are rotated with wheat which uses the nitrates in the
soil. In the third year nitrates are replenished by
growing a legume such as beans or clover, since leg-
uminous crops form nitrogenous nodules on their
roots which remain in the soil when the crop is har-
vested. In the fourth year a cereal can again be grown
to take advantage of the replenished nitrates. These
crops are typical of the Norfolk System (Fig. 26.2)
of crop rotation practised widely in temperate
regions. In warmer regions, cereals or cotton, for
example, may be rotated with groundnuts or soya
beans and root crops.
2. Controlled grazing. To prevent overgrazing, the
number of animals to be fed in a certain area must
be kept within the carrying capacity of the grassland.
In order to prevent animals overgrazing some areas,
they may be confined to certain parts of the field. In
Fi1.26.2 The Norfolk system of crop rotation

Fig. 26.3 Controlled grazing where part of the field is
allowed to lie fallow at any one time
Denmark for example cattle are tethered in partic-
ular areas each day to ensure even grazing of the
field. In the large sheep stations of Australia sheep
are kept in fenced paddocks; when one paddock has
been grazed the sheep are moved to a new area to
prevent overgrazing (Fig. 26.3).
3. Contour ploughing. In contrast to slopewise farm-
ing, contour ploughing is done at right angles to the
hill slope, following the contours of the hillside.
This impedes the downward flow of the water and
26.4 Contour ploughing in lowa. U.S.A., to prevent soil
creep Poppertoto
checks soil creep so that gullying does not develop.
Much water is also retained by the furrows and is
absorbed by the plants which are grown in a contour
pattern, improving the crop (Plate 26..4')
4. Afforestation. In many countries legislation has
been passed to prevent wanton cutting of forests and
also to ensure the immediate replanting of trees
cleared for lumbering purposes. This not only helps
to consbrve forests, a vital national resource, but
also prevents unnecessary floods that come about
with forest clearance. Forests slow the rate of run-
off by intercepting the rain and thus help to conserve
water. In Sri Lanka as in many other areas no trees
may be felled above the 1 500-metre (4,920-foot)
contour to preserve the water catchment area.
5. Cover-cropping. In many estates of the tropics
where the gestation period before a crop can be har-
vested is long, e.g. rubber, oil palm, tea or coffee,
cover crops like sweet potatoes, leguminous plants
and creepers are planted in between the young tiees
to give some protection to the top soil. When the
trees are fully grown they provide a cover but in
their early stages the ground between them may be
bare. Cover crops protect the soil and also in many
cases, provide a cash income during the period when
the trees yield no crops. Care has to be taken, how-
Grazing
,,,,u, Graling
,r/\{ ff,
f$#' l
Fallow

26.8 Rice growing on terraced hill slopes
ever, that the cover crops do not compete with the
young trees for plant nutrients.
6. Terracing. This involves the cutting of flat ter-
races on steep hill slopes to create lowland condi-
tions so that crops like wet padi or rubber can be
cultivated. For padi farming the edge of the terraces
are flanked by mud-banks or stone walls to retain
the silty water that flows down, so that the fields can
be flooded and is common in most parts of Monsoon
Asia (Plate 26.8). Terracing estates for rubber and
other tree crops acts like large-scale contour plough-
ing and helps to reduce run-off and prevents gully
formation (Fig.26.a)
Two ways of terracing hill slopes to prevent soil
7. Strip-cropping. This is the planting of crops and
trees in alternate strips parallel to one another. Dif-
ferent types of crop are planted in each strip and
they ripen at different times of the year and are har-
vested at varying intervals. This prevents the entire
field from being left bare at any one time, which
could lead to sheet erosion or wind erosion. The
taller tree crops also act as wind-breaks and provide
some shade for the ground crops.
8. Fallowing. Farmers sometimes allow part of their
fields to lie fallow after a few years of intensive use.
This is to give the field a chance to rest so that the
natural processes of vegetative decay and organic
decomposition can help to restore the essential plant
nutrients. This is much practised in the semi-arid
lands under the system of dry farming both to con-
serve ground moisture and to replenish soil
nutrients. However, in the more intensive farms of
developed countries, the scarcity and high cost of
farm land makes fallowing a rather expensive prac-
tice and farmers prefer to resort to the use of soil
additives and crop rotation instead.
9. Soil additives. Farmers are all aware that by add-
ing manures or fertilizers to the soil, its fertility can
be maintained. Organic manures, like cow-dung,
bird droppings, green manure, farm wastes, compost
and other decayed vegetation, are readily available
in the farm and when applied in suitable quantities
always increase crop yields. Modern farmers, how-
ever, prefer to use chemical fertilizers (which are
actually manufactured plant nutrients) as they are
easy to use, can be applied in specific quantities and
are readily available. The more commonly used fer-
tilizers include phosphates, potash, nitrates and cal-
cium. Phosphates, which come mainly from rock
phosphates, (organic phosphates come from guano
or bird droppings) help to form strong roots and
stems and accelerate crop maturity. Potash, usually
applied as an oxide of potassium, assists in starch
formation especially in root crops'like sugar-beet.
The best known of the nitrate fertilizers is sodium
nitrate, from the Atacama Desert of Chile, which
helps to increase. the leaf-green of cereals and leafy
vegetables. As nitrogenous organic manures are eas-
ily leached out by rain, most of the nitrate fertilizers
are employed as top-dressings to meet the immedi-
ate demand of plants. Calcium, which is a carbonate
of lime, is used to reduce the excess acidity of clayey
and other heavy soils and helps to improve the gen-
eral texture of the soils, rendering other mineral
salts more easily accessible to the plants.
Fig. 26.4
erosion

10. Irrigation. Irrigation is one of the oldest farm-
ing techniques used by men, not only in supplying
additional water in moisture deficient farm lands but
also in improving the aeration in the soil. In desert
areas likes Egypt, water in the irrigation canals also
helps to reduce the salinity of the soil making it pos-
sible for many plants to survive the highly alkaline
soil. In monsoon lands, the silt present in the irri-
gation water especially after floods is in itself a
source of plant nutrient. No wonder many Asian
farmers in irrigated farms are able to sustain their
crop yields after thousands of years' intensive use of
the land without using much fertilizer. Modern irri-
gation works are usually part of multi-purpose
schemes involving dams which supply water for irri-
gation purposes, generate hydro-electric power,
improve the navigability of the rivers and help flood
control. For example under T.V.A. (Tennessee Val-
ley Authority) in the U.S.A. over 30 multi-
purpose dams have been constructed on the Tennes-
see River and its tributaries since 1933 to rehabititate
a badly devastated farming region of some 104 000
square km (40,000 square miles) in area, using most
of the sound agricultural techniques described ear-
lier. Today the region is a thriving and prosperous
area, with well-managed farms, re-afforested hills,
industrial sites, commercial centres and tourist-fre-
quented parks. (For more details see Goh's Certif-
icate Regional Geography: North America, second
edition, Chapter 8 page 60.)
Irrigation may take many forms, depending on the
geographical location of the area, the natural drain-
age pattern, the type of climate and the crops to be
raised. The following are some of the more common
types of irrigation:
(a) Basin irrigation. This is the traditional form
of irrigation in the Nile valley and has been practised
since the time of the Pharaohs. The Nile floods
annually in summer and the flood water is retained
in basin-like rectangular fields for use in the rest of
the year, especially for cotton and padi cultivation.
Sluices are used to control the numerous irrigation
ditches that distribute the silty flood water to farms
located well away from the banks of the Nile
(Fig. 26.s).
(b) Canal irrigation. By constructing a concrete
dam across a river, a large reservoir of water can be
held back and later released in any part of the year
to feed the numerous irrigation canals that bring
water to the adjacent farms. Such perennial canals
can irrigate vast areas throughout the year, e.g. the
Sacramento and San Joaquim irrigation schemes of
Fig. 26.5 Perennial and basin irrigation in the Nileland
California, the Murray-Snowy Rivers scheme of
Australia, the Aswan Dam project in Egypt and the
various irrigation schemes on the River Indus in
Pakistan. An older and less popular kind of canal
irrigation, namely inundation canals, is used in the
Ganges and Indus basins in India. These are merely
ditches dug out on both sides of a river. They fill up
with flood water and retain the water during the
rainy season for summer crop cultivation, but they
dry up in winter when the need is greatest. Since
their use is limited, they have been gradually
replaced by the more versatile perennial irrigation
(Fig. 26.s).
(c) Tank irrigation. This involves the construction
of mud-bunds across small streams to make small
reservoirs, commonly referred to as 'tanks', to col-
lect the excess water during the rainy period. The
water is used mainly at the end of the rainy season
in India and Sri Lanka, but does not last till the dry
season. Tank irrigation, because of its temporary
nature is just as unsatisfactory as inundation ca-
nals. Some of the mud tanks on the Deccan Plateau
are many hundreds of years old and are heavily
silted.
(d) Well irrigation. In many parts of the world,
especially India and Australia, wells are sunk to
depths ranging from tens to hundreds of metres
below the ground to reach the water-table and pro-
vide water for irrigation purposes. The modern
farms in India use tube wells which have electrically
operated pumps. These can raise water from depths
Tropic of Cancer
ffi lrrigated [:l r 
l-1 Land over
Lll Lands l_l rams lE I g 014 m/3,ooo

26.C An overhead sprinkler system irrigates a potato field
in Oregon, U.S.A. Poppertoto
of 92 metres (300 feet) or more to irrigate farms of
more than a thousand hectares (2,500 acres). (See
Goh's Certificate Regional Geography: Monsoon
Asia Third Edition Chapter 1, pages 2l-3.)
In Australia, the acute shortage of rain-water
makes it necessary to bore deep wells in the artesian
basins to obtain water for animals. Artesian basins
are described in detail in Chapter 4 and illustrated
in Fig. 4.10. The greatest artesian basin is the Great
Artesian Basin of north-east Australia (Fig. a.11
page 46).
(e) Other irrigation devices. In the more remote
parts of the world, some ancient methods of irriga-
tion are still being used. In many parts of Asia,
water-wheels placed along a river or stream are used
to lift the water and throw it into the adjacent fields.
The ancient'shaduf and the Archimedean Screw for
lifting water to irrigate fields are still being used in
many villages. In modern farms of Europe, America
and Australia, automatic sprays and sprinklers are
centrally placed in the fields connected to public
water supply pipes to water the plants. This is a
rather expensive way of watering crops, but where
the return is great as in market-gardening and
orchard farming, it is economically employed. Plate
26.C shows a modern water spray, sprinkling water
in the centre of a field.
Types of Agriculture
From the earlier analysis of the various factors that
influence agriculture, it is clear that, based on such
factors as climate, relief and soil alone, different
parts of the world are suited to different types of
agriculture. We can divide them broadly into two
climatic zone types within which are other sub-types
according to the kind of agriculture practised. The
characteristic agriculture practices of the various cli-
matic regions have been described in Chapters
15-25. We shall now group them under individual
agricultural types with specific references made to
their respective chapters where more details have
been given (Fig. 26.6).
1. Tropical agriculture. The following types of
farming are best developed in tropical latitudes.
(a) Primitive subsistence agriculture. On tropical
lowlands and hill slopes local people clear small
patches of the rain forests and cultivate, with only
primitive implements, a few crops, just sufficient for
their own needs. There is no surplus for sale or
export. The soil is leached rapidly under tropical
conditions and its fertility is soon exhausted. The
people have no knowledge of soil maintenance and
there are no domesticated animals to enrich the
fields with manure. It is necessarv to clear a new

q)
t
=
.9
ED
(E
oo
c,o,
'6
0)3
o
.F
-o
.9!
!
o
q
(o
N;
iT

patch again after a few years, and the families keep
on shifting to their new fields. This sort of primitive
agriculture is best described as shifting cultivation,
e.g. the ladangs of the forested hill slopes of the
Cameron Highlands in Malaysia, cleared by the
Orang Asli (aboriginal Senois). (For details of shift-
ing cultivation see Chapter 16, page 165 on 'Shifting
Cultivation'.) If the individual farm families decide
to remain permanently in the areas they have
cleared, it is termed sedentary criltivation. This is
practised in the tropical Andean highlands of South
America.
(b) Intensive subsistence agriculture. This is also
peasant farming but very intensively done, and nor-
mally with wet padi as the chief crop. The dense pop-
ulation necessitates an ever-increasing intensity in
the use of the land. The plains are intensively tilled,
the fields irrigated and the hills terraced. Vegeta-
bles, tubers, and fruit trees are grown on raised beds
between the fields. Close personal attention is
devoted to the farm and the soil is kept at a high
fertility level with consequent high yields. But one
outstanding feature is that there is little or no excess
produce for export. This is typical of such large, civ-
ilized nations as China, India and Japan. Some geog-
raphers refer to this as Oriental agriculture, because
it is so widely practised in Monsoon Asia. (See
Chapter 21, page 202'.F armins in Monsoon China'. )
(c) Plantation agriculture. This is the cultivation
of tropical raw materials in large estates or planta-
tions solely for export. It is a commercialized form
of tropical farming initiated by the European colo-
nists, and has greatly assisted the economic devel-
opment of the many newly independent countries.
Rubber is the chief plantation crop of Malaysia and
Indonesia, cultivated in both large estates and small-
holdings (Plate 26.D). Cotton is more important in
the East African states and cocoa and oil palm in
West Africa (especially Ghana and Nigeria). In the
Philippines the plantation crops are coconuts, sugar-
cane and Manila hemp. In India and Sri Lanka, cof-
fee was the chief commercially cultivated beverage
till it was destroyed by insect pests. It was then
replaced by tea of which large quantities were and
still are shipped direct to London. Brazil took up the
place left by India and Sri Lanka and has succeed-
ed in becoming the world's largest producer of
'fazenda-grown' coffee (Plate 26.E). In Jamaica and
other West Indian islands sugar-cane and bananas
have become major plantation crops. Most of these
plantations are financed by foreign capital but worked
by local labour. Their future is very much in the
26.D Rubber, chief plantation crop of Malaysia needs well-
drained soils
26.E Coffee drying in Brazil. The sun-dried coffee beans are
being raked up and will then be sent to the factory, Popper-
foto

26.F Mechanization has allowed huge areas to be cultivated
with cereaf crops. National Film Board of Canada
hands of the industrial West whose demand and con-
trol of such primary products affect the fluctuation
of prices. (Also see Chapter 16, page 163 on .High-
land plantation farming'.)
2. Temperate agriculture
(a) Extensive mechanized cereal cultivation. This
is typical of the new lands of the New World with
a continental type of climate; e.g. Canada, the
U.S.A., Argentina, Australia as well as parts of the
U.S.S.R. Farms are so large (anything from 240 to
16 200 hectares 1,600 to 40,000 acres) that all stages
of cultivation from ploughing and sowing to har-
vesting are done by machines. Agriculture is entirely
mechanized (Plate 26.F). The yields are lower than
those on more intensive farms but are steadily
improving and total production is great. The tem-
perate grasslands form the 'granaries of the world',
from which densely-populated Europe obtains its
supplies of wheat. (For further details see Chapter
20, page 193 on 'Extensive Mechanized Wheat Cul-
tivation'.)
(b)Pastoral farming. The commercial domestica-
tion of animals is particularly important in the tem-
perate grasslands. Sheep are ke_pt in millions for
either wool or meat or both. Refrigeration, devel-
oped in the nineteenth century, accelerated the
development of large-scale pastoral farming and the
grasslands have become the leading suppliers of
mutton and beef to meat consumers in all corners
of the globe. Near industrial centres as in the eastern
U.S.A., Britain, the Low Countries, south-east Aus-
tralia and Auckland, New Zealand, dairy farming
is practised. The cattle are kept for milk and other
products. Large quantities of butter, cheese, cream
and condensed or evaporated milk are exported.
In less favourable climatic conditions. as in sub-
tropical Queensland and the dry Great Plains of the
U.S.A. cattle ranching purely for beef is more
important. (For more details see Chapter 20, page
196 on 'Pastoral farming', Chapter 22, page 2Ll on
'Mixed farming' (including dairy farming), also
Chapter 22, page 000 on 'Sheep rearing'.)
Another form of cattle farming called transhum-
ance should be mentioned. This involves the driving
of cattle from the valleys to the alpine pastures on
the mountains in summer. With the return of snow
in winter, the cattle are driven back to the valleys
to be stall-fed or grazed on lowland meadows. It is
very important in Norway, Switzerland, Austria and
in the Rocky Mountains. If the animal migration
takes place in semi-arid steppes, it is called nomadic
herding.
(c) Mixed farming. This is a widely practised form
of farming in Britain and many parts of Europe. It
is a combination of arable farming and animal hus-
bandry. Cereals, root crops, vegetables, even fruits
are raised side by side with cattle, sheep, pigs and
poultry. It is a thoroughly mixed sort of land use that
keeps the farmer fully occupied throughout the year.
In winter, some farmers who live close to the forests
take to lumbering. (See Chapter 23, page 221 on
'Lumbering'.)
A greater intensification of any of the various
aspects of the mixed farm, can lead to the devel-
opment of quite different forms of agricultural spe-
cialization in the same area. Farms that concentrate
on food crops grown on ploughed land, such as
wheat, barley, oats or rye are engaged in arable
farming. Those whose interests are concentrated on
fruits (deciduous or Mediterranean fruits) practise
orchard farming (see Chapter 19 page 186 on
'Orchard farming'). If the concentration is on small
fruits or horticultural crops (vegetables, salads) the
more correct term for this practice is market-gar-
dening, or truck-farming as it is called in the United
States. (See Chapter 22, page 210 on 'Market gar-
dening' and page 2ll on 'Mixed farming'.)

barley
Fig.26.7 The heads of the main cereals
Agricultural Crops of the World
There is such a variety of crops cultivated in the
world, that we need some sort of classification
before they can be effectively dealt with. They fall
under these groups.
l. Cereals: Rice, wheat,maize or corn, barley, rye,
oats, millets (Fig. 26.7).
2. Beverages: Tea, coffee, cocoa, wine.
3. Fibres: Cotton, wool, flax, silk, and the rest of
the hard fibres, jute, abaca (Manila hemp), sisal
hemp, sunn hemp.
4. Raw materials and others: Rubber, sugar-cane
and sugar-beet, fruits, vegetable oils (oil palm,
coconuts, groundnuts, soya beans, olives, etc.)
As it is not possible to deal with all of them in
detail within the short space available in this book
the basic facts on some of these major crops are pre-
sented in concised form, and illustrated in corre-
sponding world economic maps and charts.

TABLE I CEREALS
" 
f.ffi rice-growing regions 
Scale 1:215000000
Fig. 26.8(a) World distribution of rice
General
1. RICE (Figs. 26.8 a & b)
(a) Rice (Oriza sativa), the staple food of the
Oriental countri-es, probably feeds more people
than any other grain. It grows with great rap-
idity in tropical conditions and yields more food
per hectare than any other cereal. Annual out-
put varies.
(b) It is mainly raised on the basis of intensive
subsistence farming in Monsoon Asia as wet or
swamp padi. It is cultivated on flood plains,
river deltas, coastal districts, well-watered low-
lands, irrigated fields and terraced uplands.
(c) There are several hundred varieties of padi,
each is sown to suit local climatic and topo-
graphical conditions. They are raised in single,
double or treble croppings. Their yields vary
from about I 000 kg/hectare (890 lb per acre)
in Laos to 3 050 kg/hectare (2,720lb per acre)
in Peninsular Malaysia,5 900kg/hectare (5,250 lb
per acre) in Spain and over 6 100 kg/hectare
(5,500 lb per acre) in Japan and S. Korea Wet
padi normally doubles the yield of dry padi.
(d) Milled or polished rice is a seriously defi-
cient diet and needs to be supplemented by
other foodstuffs. Rice cultivation is usually
associated with poverty and over-population.
(e) Rice is raised for local consumption and
only between 3Vo and 5Vo enters international
trade. The bulk is produced and consumed in
Asia itself. Yields and output must be raised to
meet the rapid population increase.
26.G Rice planting in Japan. In many farm-
ing operations machines are now replacing
manual labour.
A TABLE SUMMARY OF THE
MAJOR AGRICULTURAL CROPS OF THE WORLD
deographical Requirements
(a) Rice is a tropical or sub-tropical crop, and
can be successfully grown in Monsoonal, Warm
Temperate Maritime and Mediterranean Cli-
mates, if necessary with irrigation. Uplands can
be terraced for rice.
(b) Heavy annual rainfall of at least | 270 mm
(50 inches), but over 2 000 mm (80 inches) is
ideal. Irrigation bridges the rainfall deficiency
gap in the drier lands. It requires plenty of rain
during the 4 to 6 months growing period, and
a sunny harvesting time.
(c) High mean temperature of 18'to 27'C(65"
to 80'F) with no cold season. A warm, dry
period for harvesting.
(d) Level ground because flat fields can be
more easily flooded or irrigated by canals.
(e) Soil should be loamy or clayey. An imper-
vious sub-soil is essential as it is retentive of
moisture.
(f) Requires cheap and abundant labour for
sowing, transplanting, harvesting, threshing,
winnowing, milling and field preparation.
World Production and Distribution
(a) The output of world rice amounts to
around 367 million tonnes of which 957o is
grown and consumed in Asia. (1977 figures)
(b) China, the greatest producer and consumer
of rice accounts for 367o of world's rice, mainly
in the three river basins.
(c) India, grows 20Vo of world's rice and
imports annually, though half of India's popu-
lation consumes wheat too. Chief areas: Indo-
Gangetic Plain and coastal India.
(d) Japan, Indonesia and Bangladesh; each
contributes around 57o of the world production
and imports to supplement production.
(e) The rice exporters are Burma, Thailand
(3Vo and 4Vo of world production respectively).
(f) Others: the Socialist Republic of Vietnam,
Philippines, Brazil, S. Korea, the U.S.A. and
Pakistan.
M aj or rice - p ro ducin g countries
(by 7o of world total)
China 
36 Burma
India
Indonesia
m Brazil
S.Korea
J
z
I
I
Bangladesh 
Philippines
Japan 
U.S.A.
Thailand
Pakistan
Vietnam 
Source: FAO Year Book of Agricultural Statb-
tics. 1978.
2sl

:!4
South Africa
I 
wheat-growing regaons
Scale 1:215000000
Fig. 26.9(a) World distribution of wheat
General
2. WHEAT (Figs. 26.9 a & b).
(a) Wheat (Triticum), the bread-grain, is
grown in every continent, particularly in the
temperate zone.
(b) About 80Vo ot the world's wheat is
autumn-sown winter wheat, hard and palatable
with a high gluten content. It is a balanced food
and is more nutritious than any other food
grain. 20Va of the world's wheat is spring
wheat. It is soft, coarser, with more moisture,
more suitable for making biscuits, cakes,
pastes, alcohol, etc.
(c) Wheat has been cultivated for over 6 000
years and there are couritless varieties, devel-
oped to meet local requirements. Wheat cultiva-
tion is extending polewards (cold-resistant
varieties) and equatorwards (drought-resistant
species). More Asians are changing to wheaF
eating because of its higher food value and also
because it is cheaper.
(d) Wheat yields are lower in extensive mech-
anized farms as in the New World (1 644 kg per
hectaref24 bushels per acre) than intensive
farms in Europe (4 035 kg per hectare/60 bush-
els per acre).
(e) Rye, barley and oats replace wheat in tem-
Derate lands where conditions are harsher.
Geographical Requirements
(a) Wheat cultivation extends over great lati-
tudinal zones from sub-tropical monsoon lands
to the northerly ool temperate areas,
(b) Moderate rainfall of 304 mm (12 inches) in
the cooler arid zones and not more than
I 000 mm (40 inches) in the warmer humid
regions. A little rain just before the harvest
swells the grains and ensures a better yield.
(c) Moderate temperature of about 16.C
(60'F.) for the summer months, and without
prolonged cold in winter.
(d) Needs 90 days growing period (i.e. over
6"C142"F)) cool, moist weather; 100 days frost
Iree.
(e) Moderately stiff loam or clayey soils but
never stagnant water as in padi-lands. Most
widely cultivated on chernozems, grey-brown
earth.
(f) Flat or undulating ground to facilitate the
use of machinery. Land must be well drained.
World Production and Distribution
(a) There are rvell over 232 million hectares
(573 million acres) of land under wheat with an
output of 386 million tonnes in temperate
lands. About 15 to 2OVo enters world trade
(te77).
(b) U.S.S.R. is the greatest producer account-
ing for 24Vo of world output.
(c) U.S.A. accounts for l4Va and is an
exporter. China is next (l0%o) mainly from
North China Plain.
(d) Canada (57o), Australia (3Vo) and Argen-
tina (l.SVo) are major exporters to W. Europe.
(e) Others: India, France, Turkey, Pakistan,
West Germany, Rumania and Italy but no
export.
M aj or w he at-pro ducing c o u nt r ies
(by 7o of world total 1977)
U.S.S.R. 24 
Australia 
U.S.A. 
Pakistan 
z
China 
l0 
W. Germany 2
India 
7.5 Rumania 
Canada 
Italy 
France 
4.5 Argentina 
1.5
Turkey 

23%oN 
t
Central Am
Ni
I
I
I
' 
I-"ir"-srowiru resions 
scale : 1 : 215 OOO OOO
Fig. 26.10 World distribution of maize
26.H The United States supplies
ments of the world. Popperfoto
half the maize require-
General
3. MAIZE/CORN (Fig. 26.10)
(a) Maize originated in America as Indian
corn. The corn is ground to make maize mcal
(Mealie) but is not good for bread-making.
(b) Has many varieties. Dent is soft maize, and
flint is hard maize. Also eaten as sweet corn.
pop corn. Many new hybrids give better yields.
(c) Many uses: food-crop, animal fattening,
cornflakes, alcohol distilling, etc.
Geogtaphical Requirements
(a) Grows best in sub-tropical regions between
50'N and 40" S where there are 140 frost-free
davs.
(b) A mean temPerature of 21'C (7ffF) and
long warm summers.
(c) Moderate to heavy summer rain 890 rnm
(35 inches).
(d) Deep, nitrate-rich, well-watered soil, low-
lands preferred.
World Production and Distribution
(a) About 230 million tonnes of maize are pro-
duced a year.
(b\ 46Eo of world's output is from the U.S.A.
mainly from the Corn Belt.
(c) Others: China (10%), Brazil (5.5Vo), the
U.S.S.R., Rumania, Yugoslavia and S' A.frica
(3Vo each\, Mexico, France and Argentina
(2.5Vo each), India, Italy and Hungary (2/o
each).
Source: FAO Production Year Book 1978
Barley, Rye, Oats, Millet. These are the more
hardy cereals of secondary importance. Toler-
ant of inferior soil. less favourable climate.
more interior and continental reqions, even of
increased altitude or latitude. They are used as
food erains, animal feedstuffs, for industrial
or"r, J.g. distilling and malting. Major produc-
ers: U.S.A., Canada, W Germany, Poland,
France, China, Sweden, the United Kingdom,
the U.S.S.R. and other temperate countnes.
Millet is also grown in tropical countries.

A TABLE SUMMARY OF THE MAJOR AGRICULTURAL CROPS OF THE WORLD
TABLE II BEVERAGES
Fig. 26,1 1(a) World distribution of tea
General
1. TEA(Figs.26.11a&b)
(a) Tea (Thea camellia) is a universal bever-
age, the cheapest and the most widely drunk.
(Four times as much coffee as tea is required
to flavour lhe same quantity of water).
(b) Tea probably originated in China and was
drunk as plain China (Green) tea. But today
the greatest tea-drinkers are the British, mainly
imported-lndian Black tea, which is fermented
and has 507o tannin removed. Asians also drink
semi-f€rmented Oolong tea from Taiwan. Tea
is also prepared from Yerba mate as Paraguay
Tea, widely drunk in South America. Tea pro-
ducers need not be the greatest tea consumers.
(c) Tea has many varieties. Indian tea has
more weight: Chinese tea high flavour and Tai-
wanese tea good scent.
(d) Tea gardens are small in China and Japan.
Large tea plantations in India and Sri Lanka
are mainly owned by Europeans (210 to 2 400
hectares/l00 to 6,000 acres).
Geographical Requirements
(a) An evergreen perennial shrub that grows
in tropical and subtropical latitudes.
(b) High temperature of over 2l"C (70e$ dur-
ing the growing season. Growth is continuous
and picking can be done throughout the year.
(c) Heavy rainfall benveen 1270 and 5 1([ mm
(50 and 200 inches), without any prolonged
drought or cold.
(d) No killing frost though the shrub can wirh-
stand occasional cold spells.
(e) Likes slightly acidic soil without calcium.
Makes heavy demand on nitrates.
(f) Grows best on highlands and well-drained
slopes. This gives a better flavour, but less
yield.
(g) Demands cheap, abundant (female) labour
for picking 'flush' (a bud and two leaves).
Drying and packing tea is tedious and patient
work. Indian tea is picked every lG-15 days.
Chinese tea three times a ycar (April to July).
(h) Likes shade provided by large trees. Cool
air and humid weather stimulates leaf growth.
Cultivation/Processing
(a) Cultivation. Tea is grown from seeds in
nurseries or from cuttings. Transplanted six
months later. into Dlantations: bushes 1.5 m
(5 ft) apart. Pruning at regular intervals to
stimulate growth of shoots. Shrubs are pruned
to 1.5 m (5 ft) and can be picked at end of sec-
ond ycar. up till fifticth yeaI
(b) Prme*sing. Picked tea leaves first weighed
(pickers are paid by piece-rate), and then with-
ered or dried. Tea rollers crush the leaves and
is then fermented to make black tea. It is then
Fig.26.11(b) The major tea producers
Production Year Book, 1978
dried again before it is sifted, graded and
packed in lead-lined chests.
World Production and Distribution
(a) The world's output of tea amounts to
nearly 1.8 million tonnes in 1977.
(b) India is the largest producer, 32Vo, mainly
from Assam Hills, Darjeeling and Himalayan
foothills.
(c) Sri Lanka is the third greatest Producer
(12%)but the second greatest exporter. China,
though the second greatest producer (197c).
exports much less than Sri Lanka.
(d) Others: the U.S.S.R., Kenya and Japan
(6Vo each), Indonesia and Bangladesh (2%
each). Taiwan, Paraquay, Peninsular Malaysia
and East Africa.
of the world FAO
Tea
10 20 30 40 50 60 
100 7o
lrrlll
lndia
China
o
o
o
G
E,
U'
U)
o
ov
o
o
o
Other East Africa{
Tu rkeY 
-
Bangladesh
Or
* East Africa includes Malawi, Uganda,
Tanzania and Mozambiou€.
Argentina
hers

asrAfric?-
N
tf
I
)v
/'/
! 
coffee-Srowing regions
Scale 1: 215 000 000
Fig. 26.12(a) World distriburion of coffee
General
2. COFFEE (Figs. 26.12 a & b)
(a) Coffee, originated in the dis-
trict of Kaffa in Ethiopia and was
drunk firsl by the Arabs as Coffee
Arabica. It was introduced into
Europe by the invasion of the
Turks, and by the Dutch to the
East Indies, and later to Brazil,
Latin America, West Indies.
(b) It is the second most exten-
sively drunk beverage (after tea),
but is spreading fast in America
and Australasia. The U.S.A. is the
greatest coffee importers.
(c) There are 3 major varieties.
Coffee Arabica-finest flavour;
Coffee Robusta-W. African hardY
coffee; Coffee Liberica-lowland
coffee.
(d) Coffee supremacy changed
hands from Arabia to W. Indies,
Sri Lanka, Java now Brazil (Sao
Paulo).
Geographical Requirements
(a) A hot crop, thrives in the troP
ics, even in areas with little mois-
ture.
(b) Likes high temperature, can
survive even in day temperatures
of over 32 "C (90 "F) in Arabia.
(c) Annual rainfall ranging from
I 100 to I 780 mm (zl0 to 70 inches).
A relatively dry season for pick-
ing.
(d) Thrives in soil of high fertility,
e.g. the.terra roxa, the rich volca-
nic earth of Brazil, 18 m (60 feet)
deep, with much potash.
(e) Like tea, grows sueessfullY on
elevated uplands, well-drained hill
slopes with much air and moisture.
(f) Coffee shuns direct sunlight'
iome shade is preferrgd'
(g) Demands cheaP, abundant
labour for picking.
(h) A coastal Position is an advan-
tage. Marine haze and sea mists
have a cooling effect
Cultlvatlon/Processing
(a) Cultlvation Seedlings are
raised in seed-beds and trans-
planted after six months, with a 3-
m (l0-foot) spacing. The trees are
annually pruned to ensure heavy
bearing and to ease picking. Har-
vesting begins in the third,year
when the shrub is 2-4 m (6-12
feet) high. Peak production in the
eighth year, and yields berries for
over 30 years.
(b) hocesslng. Coffee berries are
hand-picked, cured and washed.
Beans are separated frorn pulp,
thoroughly dried, mechanically
sorted and graded. Packed in
sacks, for export.
World Production and Dls-
tribution
(a) About 22Vo otthe world's cof-
fee comes fuom Brczil (1977
figures). Excess coffee is burnr,
production regulated to stabilize
prices. Crop diversification recom-
mended.
(b) Columbia (72Vo) is the next
greatest producer, followed by the
Ivory Coast and Mexico.
(c) Others: Uganda, El Salvador,
Java (Indonesia), Ethiopia, Guate-
mala and India.
Fig. 26.12(b) Malor coffee producers of the world FAO Pro-
duction Year Book,1978
90 100 "/.
lvory Coast
Cameroun
El Salvador
Zake
Malagasy
Indonesia
Ethiopia
Guatemala
Kenya
?(<

6 a
{F
F
23;.N
0"
23i"S
)/)
-o
N
It-
I
tiiii:l
cocoa-growing regions
LJ
Scale 1: 215 000 000
Fig. 26.13(a) World distribution of cocoa
General
3. COCOA (Figs. 26.13a & b)
(a) The cacao tree (Theobroma
cacao) is a native of equatorial
Africa which produces cocoa
beans or seeds for making cocoa
powder and chocolate.
(b) There are two varieties of
cocoa: Criolio from tropical Amer-
ica (superior grade, low yield, dis-
ease prone) and forastero from
Africa (inferior quality, high
yield).
(c) Grown mainly by natives in
smallholdings solely for export to
Western countries.
Geographical Requirements
(a) Likes a hot, moist, equable cli-
mate with temperature over 24"C
(75'F) and rainfall of 2 000-3 500
mm (80-1,10 inches) without long
droughts.
(b) Well-drained porous soil, with
potassium.
(c) Likes some shelter from direct
sun and wind.
(d) Thrives best near coasts within
tropics.
(e) Hurricanes and tornadoes
damage crops.
Gultivation/Processi ng
(a) Cultivstlon. The cacao tree has
its fruits after five years in pods
growing from its trunk.
(b) Processlng. The pods are har-
vested with knives and spilt open.
Beans are separated from the pulp,
fermented for a week, dried for
another week, then packed and ex-
ported.
World Production and Dis-
tribution
(a\ 60Vo of the world's cocoa com-
es from West Africa; (1978
figures). Ghana (22Vo), the lvory
Coast (llVo) and Nigeria (157o).
(b) Others: Brazil (16%o\, Came-
roun (57o), Ecuador (4Vo),Mexico
and Columbia.
Fig.26.13(b) A cocoa plant
26.1 Cocoa obtained from the pods is used for making
cocoa powder and chocolate. Jabatan Penerangan MalaYsia

A TABLE SUMMARY OF THE MAJOR AGRICULTURAL CROPS OF THE WORLD
TABLE III FIBRES
, 
Gelra
-\t
Scale 1: 215 000 000
cotton-growing regions
--{
Fig. 26.14(a) World distribution of cotton
General
1. COTTON (Figs. 26.14a & b)
(a) Cotton (Gossypium), 'King of
fibres' is the most widely used tex-
tile fibre, for making clothes, fur-
nishingfabrics, bedlinen, industrial
cloth and a host of other materials.
It competes with wool, silk, rayon,
nylon, other hard fibres and synth-
etic fibres in the market.
(b) Cotton has many varieties,
e.g. Sea-Island cotton (the best,
longstapled-over 45 mrn/1* inches
in length of staple). The Egyptian
and Peruvian varieties are also
highly priced with a staple length
of over 29 mm (11 inches). The
American upland cotton and those
of Brazil and the U.S.S.R. are
medium-stapled (22 mm to 29 mml
t inch to l[ inches). The coarsest
and shortest-stapled (less than 22
mm/$ inch) are the Asiatic var-
ieties, e.g. Indian Deccan and those
of the Far East.
(c) Many inventors are associated
with the cotton textile industry.
Hargreaves invented'spinning jen-
ny'; Cartwright, the power loom,
etc.
(d) The mechanical cotton picker
can replace 100 manual pickers
(each picking 68 k9150 lb a day),
gave rise to unemployment and
other social problems in the Deep
South, U.S.A.
Fig.26.14(b) Major world producers of raw cotton. FAO
Production Year Book, 1977
Geographical Requiremants
(a) Cotton is an annual, cultivated
extensively from 35'N to 25'S
within the tropics, best suited to
the China type of climate.
(b) A summer growing tempera-
ture of 21 "C (70'F)) is best with
bright, sunny days for harvesting.
Rain at picking spoils the boll,
from which the lint is extracted
and exported.
(c) Ample rain is preferred, about
I 000 mm (tl0 inches). coming in
frequent showers, with sunny
periods in between. When mois-
ture is less than 500 mm (20 in-
ches), irrigation is necessary.
(d) Cotton is very sensitive to
frost; a least 200 days frost-free are
necessary.
(e) Medium loam is best. Exhaus-
tive of nitrates but manuring and
crop rotation help.
(f) Level ground facilitates use of
machinery, e.g. automatic cotton-
picking machines.
(g) Cheap and patient labour, if
hand-picked.
(h) Prone to attack by insect pests,
e.g. boll-weevil, counteracted by
aerial spraying.
Gultivation/Procossing
(a) Cultlvation. Seeds are sown in
fields and thinned out to 380 mm
(15 inches) apart. They grow to a
height of 1l m (5 feet) before they
are picked, and resown. The har-
vested cotton has to be ginned by a
special saw-gin (invented by Eli
Whitney) to separate the seeds
from the lint.
(b) Manufacture. The cotton lint
is carded into fibre-ropes, spun
into yarn (thread), then woven
into cloth in looms; dyed, printed
and finished.
(c) Cotton yrrn 
pmducerc.
U.S.S. R. (l1Vo), China (74Vo), the
U.S.A. (l2Vo) and India (107o).
(d) Others: Japan, Pakistan,
France, Poland, Italy, W. Ger-
many, Hong Kong and Egypt.
World Productlon and Dis-
trlbution
(a) More than 14 million tonnes of
cotton was produced (1977 figures)
and has great significance in inter-
national trade.
(b) The U.S.A. (22Vo\, is the
largest producer and mainly from
the cotton Belt.
(c) The U.S.S.R. (l9Vo) nainly
from the Ukraine and Turkestan.
(d) China (16Vo) tuon the North
China Plain.
(e) India (8Vo), low grade, short-
stapled from the Deccan.
(f) Othen: Egypt, Brazil, Mex-
ico, Pakistan, Turkey and the
Sudan.
I U € E g;f$i;

N
I
--f-
I
I
Fig. 26.15(a) World distribution of sheep rearing
Generrl
(a) Wool is the most important
animal fibre of the temperate
lands. Used for the woollen and
worsted industry. It comes from
many animals, chiefly sheep, the
most numerous of all domesticated
animals. Some wool is also derived
from Cashmere goats, Angora
goats, (mohair), Ilamas, alpacas,
vicunas, camels and other hairy
creatures.
(b) Wool has insulating prop
erties, keeps warm, abrcrbs mois-
ture, resisb wrinkling, of great
durability and strength. It is highly
desired in colder climates or up
land regions.
(c) Wool diffen in thickness, lus-
tre and durability. Best in Menno
wool which originated in Spain and
N. Africa and is now reared in the
southern continents, accounting
for one-third of all wool (12-22
kgU-45 lb per Merino sheep per
year). Original English breeds are
less important now, mainly Cross-
bred for dual purposes - wool and
meat and account for half of all
wool. The rest is coars€, carpel
wool.
(d) Selected breeding has devised
new and better breeds.
Geographlcal Requlrcmentr
(a) Wool-bearing mammals are
most widely found in the tempera-
ture and sub-tropical lands which
are not t(X) hot for the hair to get
coarse and short; more in cool
lands.
(b) Damp environmenl like humid
tropics is less suited, may lead to
liver-fluke an foot-rot diseases.
(c) A cool, dry climate, 21 "C
(70'F), with light to moderate rain-
fall (380-890 mr/15-35 inches).
(d) Well-drained ground for open
grazing, no damp pastures.
(e) Man-sown alfalfa or luccrne
grass is best.
(f) Sheep are now driven to poor-
er lands, foo rrills, uplands.
(g) Extensive meadows reduce
overgrazing.
Cuhlvatlon/Processlng
nocecsltrg
(a) Sheerlng. The fluffy wool
from sheep is machine-clipped by
elpert shearers and transported 'in
the grease': A sheep yields be-
tween 4 kg and 10 kg (8 lb and
z) lb).
(b) Scourlng. Removal of grea*,
to be fitrelv flrled.
(c) Cnrafrig. Combing of the
fibres.
(d) Splnnlng. Spun into yam.
(e) Wevlng. Woven into superior
3. RESTOFTHE HARD FIBRES
(r) Jutc. Tall annual, grows best in
wet. alluvial soil: hot moist cli-
mate. Used for cheap sacking,
(gunny), burlap. Produced in In-
dia, (29/o), Bangladesh, (247o).
China (!4Vo) and Thailand (5.57o)
(1977 figures).
(b) Abrcs or Menllo hemp. Bana-
na-like leaf stalks. Demands warm,
humid conditions. Highly resistant
to sea-water, so used for ropes.
Philippines'monopoly'-957o and
Sabah (Malaysia) 4%.
(c) Flgx. A slender flax plant,
lelds fibre and linseed. Temperate
conditions, cool and moist climate.
Used for quality linen (fibre),
ropes (tow). U.S.S.R., 75Vo Po-
land, Belgium, France are other
produces.
(d) Sll. Most expensive fibre,
obtained from cocoons of silk-
worms, in sub-tropical lands, feed
on mulberry or oak leaves. Needs
utmost care, patient female labour
to supervise breeding, hatching,
and reeling of filaments. Makes
quality silk, satin, velvet, plush.
Rayon (man-made silk) overrides
scriculture (processes of making
natural silk).
World's silk production: Japan
(34%), C}tina (337o). S. Korea,
the U.S.S.R., India. N. Korea and
Brazil are other produccrs.
(c) Sls.l hcmp or henequcn. A
perennial grown in Central Amer-
ica and East Africa. Fleshy leaves
for making baler and binder twine.
Sisal: Brazil (48Vo), Tanzania
(23Vo), lknya (1Vo), tvlalagtsy,
Angola, Haiti and China.
(D IImp ffbrc or sunl hemp. A
humid warm temperate fibre of
solthcm Europe. Hand-hawest,
hardy fibre. lndia (XVo), the
U.S.S.R. (23Vo), Runania (llVol
and China (10%). Other produers
are Turkey, Poland, Yugoslavia,
Bulgaria and Pakistan.
I"Tj:f:,?1".:::qualitv woollens Fig. 26.18(b) Major wortd producers of woot FAo produc-
(Q Dyed and finished. 
tion Year Book' 1977
World Productlon and Dir-
trlbutlon
(a) The world's output of wool is
around 3 million tonnes, mainly
from temperate grasslands (1977
figures)
(b) Australia is the leading pro-
ducer and exprtet (!0Vo).
(c) The U.S.S.R. is next in wool
production (187o).
(d) New Znaland (12Vo), Argenti-
na(6.5Vo), and S. Africa (4Vo\ arc
other major wool producers.
Wool
€s g g g ; s
3to gE J r
D
o
CD
g 4 
,-.i
9urz
6@
:j

miles 600
lL)t''1
Nt
Scale 1:215000000
Fig. 26.16 World distribution of rubber
General
1. RUBBER (Fig. 26.16)
(a) Hevea Brasiliensis is commercially the most
important. lts original home was Brazil from
which the wild Para rubber was first brought by
Sir Henry Wickham in the form of a few thou-
sand seeds to Kew Gardens. London. It was
then introduced into Peninsular Malaysia the
following year in 1877, which became one of
the world's greatest natural rubber producers.
Much also comes from neighbouring South-
East Asian countries.
(b) There are other non-commercial species,
e.g. Kok saghyz of the U.S.S.R., Guayule of
Mexico, Belata of S. America and Funumia-
e/ast cd of West Africa. The commercially prized
Hevea Brasiliensa is now improved through
bud-grafting and the use of other clonal seed-
lings. Its yield has been raised from 390 kg of
latex per hectare (350 lb per acre) to I 680 to
2 350 kg/hectare (1,500 to 2,100 lb per acre)
per year. Researches conducted in the Rubber
Research Institute, Kuala Lumpur are expected
to double or treble the present yield.
(c) The meteoric rise of rubber was due to the
discovery of vulcanization of rubber by Charles
Goodyear which led to the manufacture of
pneumatic rubber tyres in connection with the
automobile industry, later electric wiring.
Numerous other industrial uses: hoses, foot-
wear upholstery, etc.
(d; Greatest threat is from synthetic rubber
which supplies ffiVo of world rubber today.
A TABLE SUMMARY OF THE
MAJOR AGRICULTURAL CROPS OF THE WORLD
TABLE IV RAW MATERIALS & OTHERS
Geographical Requarements
(a) Rubber is entirely confined to the tropics
as a lowland plantation crop, and can even be
successfully grown on foothills, up to 610 m
(2,000 feet).
(b) A high uniform temperature of 27'C
(80 "F) throughout the year. It is least tolerant
of cold, and yield diminishes with increasing
latitude and altitude.
(c) Annual rainfall of 2 030 mm (80 inches)
and above, well distributed throughout the
year. Hot and moist climate is best.
(d) For optimal growth, the soil should be
deep, slightly acidic, well drained and fertil
ized.
(e) It survives best on forest-cleared lowlands,
and beyond 610 m (2,000 feet), it is liable to
fungus attack.
(f) Cover crops planted will help to reduce the
rate of top-soil erosion in a region of heavy tor-
rential downpours. Cover crops are useful in
providing some cash sales, as rubber cannot be
tapped till the sixth year, takes long maturing
period.
(g) High maintenance cost, regular weeding
necessary.
(h) Cheap, patient labour for tapping, Pro-
cesslng.
(i) Good transport network, a purely export
crop.
World Production and Distribution
(a) The world's annual output of 3.5 million
tonnes natural rubber comes mainly from
South-East Asia (857o). Brazil, the briginal
home of rubber now accounts for less than 1 7o.
(b) The two leading single producers are
Malaysia (AVo) and Indonesia (23.5Vo, 1977
estimates). Rubber is found in larse estates or
smallholdings in Peninsular Maiaysia. It is
grown in eastern Sumatra and Java.
(c) Sri Lanka which started growing rubber
earfier than Malaysia, produces about 4Vo
mainly in the south-west.
(d) Thailand, with quite similar conditions
accounts for l2Vo, mainly in Kra Isthmus.
(e) India and Liberia account for 4Vo and 2Vo
respectively of world rubber production.
(f) Vietnam, Kampuchea, Burma and other
Asian counlries have very little rubber.

,'' 
tet t
SugarBeet 
| , 
Y 
\
loroor"insareas I 
/ 
t
\{
Sugar Cane 
I 
lproducing 
ar"as 
\A v 
scare 1 : 215 000 000
)/|-v-
Nt
Fig.26.17 World distribution of sugar-cane and sugar-beet
General
2. SUGAR (CANE & BEET) (Fig. 26.17)
(a) Commercially used raw sugar comes from
two sources: 60Vc Irom tropical cane sugar and
4OVo from temperate beet sugar. The former is
mainly an export crop, 5070 enters world trade,
whereas the latter is purely for home consump-
tion. Cane sugar is freely traded and has high
yield, beet sugar is tariffed and has low yield.
(b) The refining of sugar is mainly confined to
industrial countries, a complex process, yields
crystal-sugar and molasses from which rum
alcohol is obtained. Beet tops and pulps are
used for animal feeding, cattle or pig food.
Geographical Requirements
(a) Sugar-cane needs high temperature (21 "C/
70'F), ample rainfall (1 520 mm/60 inches),
not excessive during ripening period, may
dilute the sugar content. Likes deep nitrate
soil, retentive of moisture; irrigation neces-
sary for better yields. Cultivated mainly on
lowlands.
(b) Sugar-beet, an annual of the temperate
lands. Cultivated for'partial self-sufficiency
policy in sugar' in Europe, highly subsidized.
Needs 16'C (60'F) temperature, 760 mm (30
inches) rainfall; deep, friable soil; grown in
crop rotatlon.
World Production and Distribution
Distribution
(a) Raw sugar amounts to 50 million tonnes in
1977 comes mainly from sugar-cane of which
lndia -(20Vo), Brazll (16Vo), Cuba (87o) and
China (6Vo) are the leading producers. Others:
Mexico, Pakistan, the U.S.A., Thailand, Aus-
tralia, Philippines and Columbia.
(b) Beet sugar has practically no international
trade. Producers are the U.S.S.R. (327o),
France (8.57o), the U.S.A. (87o), East and
West Germany, Italy, Poland, United King-
dom and Czechoslovakia.
3. FRUITS
(a) Commercial fruits are either tropical
(bananas, pineapples), Mediterranean (grapes
and cltrus trurts: oranges, lemons) or deciduous
fruits (apples, pears, plums, peaches, apricots,
cherries).
(b) Fruit cultivation: Has to meet problems of
perishability: long gestation period; need for
restocking periodically; price fluctuation (trade
recession hits fruits first); susceptibility to frost,
drought, insect pests, diseases; need for
detailed meteorological sewice.
(a) Tropical fruits, Heavy annual rainfall,
high uniform temperature, cool sea breezes,
rich soil. Dates in deserts like arid climate.
porous soil.
(b) Mediterranean fruits. Warm humid cli-
mate with a distinct dry season. Temperature
2l'C (70 "F). Rainfall 760 mm (30 inches).
(c) Deciduous fruits. Cool, humid climate
withoul extremes. Warm summer for harvest-
lng.
(a) Tropical frru,its. Bananas: lTVo fromBazil,
l0.5Va fron lndia.8.5Vo from Indonesia. Oth-
ers: Ecuador. Thailand. Columbia and Hon-
duras. (IAO Year Book, 1978) Pineapples:
China including Taiwan (14Vo), Hawaii, rhe
U.S.A. (lOVo), Brazil (9Vo), Thailand
(87o), Mexico and the Philippines (7Vo each),
Zdire (6Vo), the Ivory Coast and Malaysia (5Zo
each).
(b) Mediterranean fruits: Citrus fruits from
Mediterranean lands, the U.S.A., Spain, Italy,
Brazil: grapes too.
(c) Deciduou fruits, France, the U.S.A, Ger-
many, Italy, the United Kingdom, China and
Japan.
4. VEGETABLES OILS (Figs. 26,18-26.20)
(a) Includes: Oil palm, copra, groundnuts,
soya beans, cotton seeds, olives, linseed,
sesame, hemp seed, tung oil, rapeseed, castor
seed. They form the edible cooking oils or the
industrial oils. Vegetable oils make 3 of the
total cooking oil, to supplement the lack in
animal fat. Much is used in industrial fields such
as paints, varnishes, lubricants, hair cream,
margarine, candles, soap, insecticides, fertil-
izers and animal-feed. Their uses as oils and
fats have to some extent been replaced by many
synthetic and nitrogenous substitutes through
various chemical processes.
(b) Palm ojl: is most important for making
margarine, soap and cooking-fat. Coconut oil
from copra: the dried kernels of coconuts, is for
soap-making, hair oil, cooking oil and its multi-
uses in its husk (mattresses), shell (fuel), kernel
(curry-making, confectionery). Groundnutsi
edible, cooking oil, protein-rich foodmeals,
cattle-cakes. Soya beans: vegetable oil, mar-
garine, cattle meals. O#ves: Mediterranean
cooking oil, fruit.

.F
^\-
r4=*
23;'S
A(la
N
I-f
I
ffiffi1 soya beans
tiiiiiitffi
" 
l!,1!l!lll{oir Parm 
scale
l :: :'l linseed
1: 215 000 000
Fig.26.18 World distribution of ve!etable oils: linseed,
soya beans and palm oil
Fi9.26.19 World distribution of vegetable oils: copra,
groundnuts
6:
23+'N
23''S
N+
I
prt
1.2

PALM OIL
GROUNDNUTS 
:i ':
5.
cnvA 
orAilo
Fig.26.20 Bar graph showing world production of selected
vegetable oils (in millions of tonnes)
Ouestions and Exercises
1. What factors influence the agricultural practices
of the world? Select any continent, country or
island and say how the crops cultivated are
affected by the factors that you mention.
2. Outline the major differences in agricultural
types between the tropical and the temperate
regions. Illustrate your answer by giving rel-
evant examples from different parts of the
world.
3. The following crops are representative of some
of the types of crops cultivated. Select one crop
from each type:
(a) cereals: wheat, rice, maize;
(b) beverages: tea, coffee, wine;
(c) fibres: cotton, wool, silk;
(d) raw materials: rubber, timber, oil palm.
i. State what geographical factors influ-
ence their large-scale cultivation.
ii. State briefly some of their character-
istic features of production, distribution,
uses, problems and prospects.
Sample Objective Ouestions
l. Wheat can be cultivated in France
but not in Malaysia; rice is a major
export of some South-East Asian
countries but not of Western
Europe. The most important factor
that accounts for this is
A soil
B relief
C climate
D politics
million tons
Explain any three of the following:
(a) Only 3 per cent of world rice production
enters international trade.
(b) Cotton is the king of fibres.
(c) Tea is a universal drink.
(d) The supremacy of coffee cultivation has
changed hands several times.
(e) The world's trade in sugar comes from cane
not sugar-beet.
Write a geographical account of any three of. the
following:
(a) Soil erosion and soil conservation.
(b) The role of crop rotation in soil fertility
maintenance.
(c) Intensive subsistence agriculture of the
Orient.
(d) The southern continents are the greatest
wool exporters.
(e) Problems facing fruit cultivation.
4.
5.
2. To avoid monoculture and improve
soil fertility, the most likely farming
technique that farmers resort to is
A terracing
B the growing of cover crops
C contour ploughing
D crop rotation
3. Plantation agriculture differs from
subsistence farming in many re-
spects. Of the following differences,
which do you consider to be the /east
applicable?
A Crops raised in plantations are
mainly for export
B The plantations are entirely own-
ed by foreigners
C Plantations are much larger in
acreage
D Average yields from plantations
are hisher

4. The number of people involved in
farming is much lower in industrial
countries as compared to developing
countries for all but one of the fol-
lowing reasons.
A Industrial nations make greater
use of machines in farms
B Industrial countries have more
alternate occupations
C Industrial lands cannot be spared
for agriculture
D Industrial nations relv on food
imports only
5. To accelerate crop maturity as well
as strengthen root formation in
plants, farmers apply
A calcium
B phosphate
C nitrate
D potash
6. Rice farming differs greatly from
wheat farming with respect to
A water requirements
B soil type
C relief features
D farm attention
7. Which type of farming tends to re-
sult in low yield per hectare but high
yield per man?
A intensive subsistence farmins
B plantation farming
C shifting cultivation
D extensive mechanized farming
8. The Corn Belt of the U.S.A. is, in
fact, a mixed farming region because
I other crops are grown with
matze
II both Europeans and negroes
work in the farms
III animals are kept side by side
with crops
IV subsistence crops are raised on a
commercial basis
A IandII
B II and IV
C I and III
D II and III
9. Farms in Canada, the U.S.A., Au-
stralia and New Zealand are resort-
ing more and more to mechanization
in order to
A overcome rapid soil erosion
B cut down the labour force
C increase the crop yield per hec-
tare
D eliminate insect pests
10. The world's greatest rice producer is
A Thailand
B Indonesia
C India
D China
11. Successful cotton cultivation de-
pends on the following ercept
A 200 frost-free days
B ample rain coming in frequent
showers
C constantly high temperature of
over 27'C (80"F.)
D sunny weather during picking
12. 'Truck farming' refers to
A the cultivation of citrus fruits in
Mediterranean Europe
B the growing of vegetables in
Atlantic U.S.A.
C Commercial livestock farming in
the Pampas
D Greenhouse farming in the
polderland of Holland.
13. Rice is a much more inferior food
crop when compared to wheat be-
cause
A rice is grown in flooded fields
B rice is milled before consumption
C wheat is mechanically harvested
D wheat is cultivated in conducive
temperate conditions
14. The highest paid sugar-cane planta-
tion workers in the world are found
in Queensland, Australia because
the
A workers live in a developed eco-
nomy
B cost of living in Queensland is the
highest in Australia
C workers have to work for very
long hours
D risk of sunstroke in the planta-
tions is very great
15. The problem of inadequate rainfall
for farming in India can be partly
overcome by irrigation which has the
following adv antages except
A Farming can be done all year
round
B The water supply is more reliable
than rainfall
C It can support all crops
D It helps to enrich soil fertility
16. The following is a description of a
type of farming practised in a par-
ticular region:
'The farmer and his family wake
up early in the morning and work in
small plots of land around. He grows
many different types of crops, uses
very little fertilizer and much of the
work is done by hand. There is very
little surplus for disposal to other
places. When rain is excessive, his
fields are flooded; when drought is
prolonged, famine is ensured.'
The above description is most ap-
plicable to
A a commune in the Chang Jiang
(Yangtze Kiang) Basin
B a mixed farm in coastal Peru
C an arable farm in Central Otago,
New Zealand
D an intensive subsistence farm in
the Ganges Basin, India
17. I Mean summer temperature:
75'Ft24 "C
II Mean annual rainfall: 30 inches/
1125 mm
III Frost-free period: 200 days
IV Well drained, level ground.
The above conditions are necessary
for the cultivation of an important crop in
the Central Lowlands of North America.
Name this crop
A wheat
B tobacco
C cotton
D maize/corn
18. Which of the following major veget-
able oils of the world is leading in
annual production (in tonnes)?
A soya bean oil
B cotton seed oil
C palm oil
D coconut oil
19. A general drop in the prices of farm
commodities on the world market
would have the greatest effect on
A Arokiasamy, a peasant farmer in
the Deccan Plateau
B Fu Zhongming, a rubber estate
owner in Malaysia
C Anthony Webster, a factory
worker in the Midlands, England
D Nelekosky, a nomadic herdsman
in the Asiatic Steppes
2O. Dairy farming is usually practiced
near large urban areas because
A rural folk do not consume dairy
products
B only urban areas can meet the
food requirements of dairy herds
C dairy products are easily perish-
able
D the grass is greener in the towns

