Chapter 30 World Communications
The Significance of World Transport
In Chapters 26 and 27 , we studied the various kinds
of crops and minerals that men produce. We men-
tioned that many of these commodities enter inter-
national trade. They are sold and bought by traders
and consumers who are usually separated from one
another by many kilometres of land and sea. How
are these goods moved form place to place? This
brings us to another interesting topic-world trans-
port. In short, it is the role of transport in modern
commerce and industry.
To facilitate the movement of people, freight and
mail, an efficient network of cheap and speedy trans-
port is essential. Since time immemorial, men have
devised means of conveying thernselves and their
goods from one point to another. Human porterage
and beasts of burden were the earliest means of ful-
filling such a task. Tracks were stamped out by men
across difficult terrain and through the jungles.
Draught animals such as horses, buffaloes, ele-
phants, mules and camels were domesticated and
extensively employed to save men carrying things
themselves. But such animals could hardly carry a
load of more than 45 kg (100 16) and could, at best,
cover 24 km (15 miles) to 48 km (30 miles) per day.
But in those days, and even in some remote parts of
the world today, this was the only available way. In
Tibet today, yaks are still used as the most important
beast of burden in the rugged Tibetan highlands.
The Andean Indians make use of the Ilama and the
polar Eskimos still have to depend on their huskies
(dogs) and reindeer. The problem of transport has
always been in the minds of our forefathers and
takes a good portion of our national revenue today.
A good metalled road will cost several million Sin-
gapore dollars per kilometre to construct, and a fur-
ther substantial sum to maintain in serviceable
conditions. The road tax that motorists pay goes
partly to finance and maintain our roads.
In the history of transport, perhaps the most spec-
tacular progress made was by the invention of loco-
motives. George Stephenson opened the first
railway in 1825, which ushered in the 'railway age',
so vital to the development of our present land trans-
port. The introduction of the internal combustion
engine has made it necessary to construct better
roads, for motor vehicles are now the most mobile
and universal form of transport. Achievement in
world transport reached its peak with the invention
of aeroplane. The world 'shrinks' with the speed of
the 'jet age'.
LAND TRANSPORT
1. Road transport. Road ranging from mule tracks
to modern highways are the most universal form of
transport. Local people have benefited more from
road usage than any other means of transport. Rail-
ways and waterways link large centres whilst flying
is a luxury, confined only to the more wealthy. But
as soon as one steps out of one's house, one is bound
to tread on roads of some kind. They are so univer-
sal that men take for granted that roads exist, and
never pause to think of the tremendous effort and
expenses that have made them possibe.
30.A One of the disadvantages of road transport is traffic
congestion. Fleet Street, London is always busy. Central
Office of lnformation London

Modern highway transport takes various forms,
and each is meant for its specific function. Private
automobiles, passenger buses and taxis serve great
local needs but they move over relatively short dis-
tances. Trucks, lorries and vans are becoming
increasingly important in competing with railways as
freight carriers. Their flexibility is their greatest
advantage over other forms of bulk transport. In
recent years, many railway companies have found
increasing difficulty in competing effectively with the
various forms of motor transport. Private cars, long
distance taxis and chartered coaches have largely
replaced trains for passenger transport.
2. Railway transport. Railways have contributed
most significantly to the development of industrial
sites, city growth and the opening up of new lands.
In large countries and continental interiors where
other forms of organized transport are compara-
tively inadequate, railways are the only convenient
form of long-distance transport. They have in many
instances decided the pattern of population and
land use distribution. The trans-continental rail-
ways such as the Trans-Siberian Railway
(9 000 km/5,600 miles long) and the Canadian
Pacific Railway (almost 4 800 km/3,000 miles long)
are well-known for their pioneering role in the open-
30.B The Trans-Siberian Railway near lrkutsk, eastern Sib-
eria. This railway has helped to open up hitherto underde-
vefoped parts of the U.S.S.R. Society for Cultural Relations
with U.S.S.R.
ing up of the Russian Steppes and'Siberia (Plate
30.8) and the Canadian Prairies respectively. Geog-
raphers are interested in railway patterns rather than
highway patterns because railways carry bulky goods
to and from industrial sites or link population
centres. They reflect the pattern of regional geog-
raphy of an area.
The running and carrying capacity of railways is
much dependent on the width of the railway gauge.
This is the precise distance between the two metal
rails on which the wagons run. The standard gauge
is 143 cm (4 feet 8l inches), and is common in
Europe, North America and China. The world's
faster and most efficiently-run railways are all on the
standard gauge. Because of differences in topogra-.
phy or in construction costs, there are also some rail-
ways which run.on the broad gauge (160 cm/5 feet
3 inches or sometimes more) or the narrow gauge
(around 107 cm/3 feet 6 inches). The former is more
suited to level ground while the latter is more likely
to be constructed across hilly tracts where there are
sharp bends to negotiate.
Australia is the best example of a country that had
its railways operated on all the three different gauges
(Fig. 30.1). They were constructed independently by
each state authority without foreseeing the difficul-
ties that were to arise when all the states were fed-
erated later as the Cornmonwealth of Australia.
Railways in New South Wales were constructed on
the standard gauge; in Queensland and Western
Australia on the narrow gauge; and in Victoria on
the broad gauge. With the federation of these states,
the Trans-Continental Australian Railwav which
Fi9.30,1 Bailways of Australia
mmw gEurr 13 fer I inchc/to7 cm)
rtEndard gouo. (4 fct Sl imha/143 ml
brcad gaugo (5 fet 3 imh6/td) ml ,*ror,og1$".".,."
!i/x'un
.Bdun ! W -....---
TERRrr,Ry ! ,-r*-r, --.''O
Alccsp.rns. a 
---.
I 
! 
ouEE!stAN-o----
II
sourH \ 
I

runs from Perth to Sydney had to travel on three
different gauges. Goods had to be unloaded and
loaded again and passengers had to change coaches
at the point where the gauge changed. It was most
inconvenient. The changeover to the standard gauge
was, however, essential and has recently been com-
pleted. This is one instance where unplanned trans-
port development can cause serious problems.
As a form of land transport, railways have played
a vital part in distribution services. Locomotives can
pull heavy loads and still travel fast. Freight trains
can travel 1 930 km (1,200 miles) a day and mail
trains can go even faster. Railways are fairly adapt-
able to topographical conditions, but the initial cost
and overhead expenses are very high. In encounter-
ing topographical barriers, railway engineers have
devised ways and means of overcoming them.
Embankments and cuttings, viaduct's and tunnels are
used to keep the track nearly level. Where the gra-
dient exceeds 1 in 50, zig-zags are constructed
(automobiles can manage a gradient up to 1:3).
In sparsely populated parts of the world, e.g. Sib-
eria, railways are often the only means of commu-
nication with the outside world though aircraft are
becoming increasingly important.
As a means of passenger transport, the railways
as a whole have declined in popularity because of
competition from automobiles. Many railway com-
panies have been forced to provide better services.
Luxury coaches have been introduced. Many are
made of aluminium alloys (which, because they are
lighter, can save up to 12 per cent on fuel) with air-
conditioned compartments, reclining chairs and
sleeping berths for long-distance night travel. Spe-
cial rates are offered for return journeys, seasonal
or party travel. Even for freight services, improved
facilities are now available. Refrigerator-cars are
used for carrying perishable fruits, vegetables and
meat. Keen competition from lorries and trucks has
resulted in extra services, such as the free delivery
of goods to the consignee, being provided by many
railway companies.
3. Inland water transport. Water transport is the
slowest but cheapest form of bulk transport. In
Europe and North America, many industrial areas
have their raw materials (coal, iron ore, rubber tim-
ber) and bulky finished goods (machinery, steel)
conveyed entirely by inland waterways. Cheapness
is the greatest asset. Many densely populated indus-
trial areas rely heavily on low-cost water transport.
The Great Lakes (joined by the Welland and Soo
Canals) and St. Lawrence Seaway, constitute one of
Fig. 30.2, Inland waterways of
Europe

the world's most important inland waterways. They
serve the industrial areas on both sides of the
U.S.A.-Canadian border. Ships laden with wheat,
dairy products, meat and industrial goods can sail
from the Prairies to the Atlantic to continue their
voyages across the North Atlantic to Western
Europe. Similarly, the numerbus man-made canals
such as the Mittelland Canal, Ems Canal and Rhine-
Rh6ne Canal joining important rivers such as the
Rhine, Weser, Elbe, Seine and Danube, have
played a very important part in the industrial and
economic development of Western Europe
(Fig. 30.2). In Asia, the Chang Jiang (Yangtze
Kiang), the Ganges and the rivers of continental
South-East Asia have all provided cheap and effi-
cient transport for their respective countries.
Waterways may be improved by dams and locks
which help to maintain a uniform depth of water.
Where waterways are too small for ships, barges or
'narrow boats' are used. Several barges are often
pulled or pushed by more powerful craft in 'barge
trains'.
Unfortunately, water transport has its own limi-
tations. Rivers lack flexibility as their natural
courses cannot be easily altered. They may flow in
directions that are not commercially desired. The
longest Russian rivers (Ob, Lena, Yenisey), flow
north into the cold uninhabited Arctic and are frozen
for the greater part of the year. In spite of this, they
are gradually being developed with the use of ice-
breakers for the export of timber and minerals from
Siberia. Some rivers like the Zaire and the Amazon
flow through dense jungles which are sparsely pop-
ulated; such rivers can only be used by the people
for bringing their local products to be exchanged at
the river-side markets.
There are other drawbacks to be considered. Most
rivers have their long profile broken by changes in
gradient. A waterfall or a rapid is sufficient to
obstruct the smooth navigation of a river. This is typ-
ical of the rivers in Africa which plunge down from
the edge of plateaux to drain into the oceans. The
Chang Jiang (Yangtze) Gorge above Ichang can only
be used by small craft. The Iron Gates on the Dan-
ube, once a dangerous stretch, have been improved
by a dam which raises the water-level. Few rivers are
perfectly navigable in their natural state. Man has
to do his part to improve their navigability. Large
rivers bring down much alluvial material, causing
silting in the lower courses. They have to be con-
stantly dredged to be usable by large steamers. The
ports on the east coast of Peninsular Malaysia are
shallow and silty because of moving sand-bars that
are built up by the stormy South China Sea. There
are other rivers that are so winding that their use-
fulness for commerce is greatly reduced. The wind-
ing nature of a river slows down navigation by
lengthening the distance. Seasonal fluctuatlon in the
volume of the water is another factor that affects the
navigable length of a river.
OCEAN TRANSPORT
Much of the world's trade passes along certain well
charted ocean routes served by established junctions
and terminals. They are the natural roadways by
which goods from one continent reach another at the
lowest possible cost. Nature has provided Man with
this vast expanse of free highway, which shipping
companies can utilize with no initial cost and no
maintenance except on the ships themselves. The
cheapness of ocean transport is a vital consideration
in international trade. '
Various kinds of vessels ranging from a few
hundred tonnes to over 300 000 tonnes sail the high
seas. The most luxurious ones are the passenger lin-
ers. They carry mainly passengers, express mail, and
a limited amount of high-value freight. They are on
scheduled routes and leave on time whether there
are enough passengers or not. Some of the large lin-
ers are like 'floating cities', complete with spacious
halls, shopping centres. swimming pools, postal
counters and banks. They carry sufficient provisions
to feed up to 2 000 passengers and crew for weeks
without refuelling. Passenger liners are suffering
more and more from competition from the airways.
Another kind of vessel which combines freight
with passengers is the cargo liner. These also keep
to scheduled routes. Their gross tonnage is about
one-third to half that of an average passenger liner.
Many of them have refrigerated hotds for carrying
perishable fruits and meat. They always reserve suf-
ficient cabin space for would-be passengers.
The next group is made up by all kinds of tramps
of between 2 000 and 10 000 tonnes. These are
independent cargo-boats that have no fixed schedule
and sail when there is cargo to carry. A tramp that
leaves Singapore in February with Malaysian rubber
and Straits tin may stop at Colombo to pick up some
tea, and call at Marseilles to unload some of the
goods destined for Lyons. When it eventually
reaches its headquarters in Southampton, it could
well be Christmas time. Such tramps sail from place
to place and receive instructions from their head-
quarters by wireless.

There are also some specially constructed vessels
designed for specific cargoes only. They are referred
to as industrial carriers. They are the ocean spe-
cialists, not jacks-of-all-trade like the tramps. They
include the oil tankers that carry only petroleum, the
self-unloading colliers that ship coal, the banana car-
riers and grain ships. They are usually owned by
large shipping companies that have world-wide
interests, or are operated by commercial corpora-
tions that own both the vessel and the cargo, e.g. oil
companies. Oil tankers are some of the biggest ships
afloat. The latest development in ocean transport
is containerization. Special ships are built to carry
containers, i.e. standard-sized metal boxes packed
with goods. This has not only made cargo handling
easier but has also eased the transfer of goods to
land transport by rail or road at the world's major
ports.
Last but not least are the coastal shipping vessels
that ply between the coastal harbours and river
ports, close to the shores. They carry the more bulky
goods which are not sent by rail. For example, ves-
sels from Singapore sail to Port Kelang, Butterworth
and Bangkok. They compete with the inland roads
and railways for carriage of the local products. They
have very little passenger traffic because of their
irregular movements.
Fig. 30.3 World shipping routes
WORLD SHIPPING ROUTES
The following are some of the principal ocean trade
routes (Fig. 30.3).
l. The North Atlantic route. This is the busiest and
the most important route, that links two of the most
populous and heavily industrialized parts of the world,
Western Europe and eastern North America. Both
the regions are highly developed and enjoy high
standards of living. The large volume of passengers
and freight is therefore to be expected. It is estimated
that half the world's major ports lie within the
sphere of this route. London, Southampton, Ham-
burg, Liverpool, Glasgow, Rotterdam, Antwerp and
Le Havre are on the European side. New York,
Philadelphia, Baltimore, Boston, Montreal and
Quebec are on the American side. Most of them
have deep, spacious harbours and first class port
facilities. Some of the world's largest shipyards and
terminal stations are located here. The region's total
annual foreign trade is more than all the rest of the
ocean routes combined. The eastward-bound goods
going to Europe comprise mainly grain (wheat),
meat, petroleum, cotton, tobacco and metallic ores.
The westward-bound trade to America is made up
mainly of manufactured goods of one kind or
another. The passenger traffic was once also brisk
but has nolv greatly declined.
€o 
e
,ilsrNAL
os Aires CApEt-FG6OD HOPE
--- 4. the Cape route,
...... 5. the South Atlantic route.
---> 6. the Suez route
H"-;b 
....-.' 2. the Panama Canal route,
_ J. ths Trans_pacific route,
21 5 000 000

30.C The Panama Canal: a ship approaching the pedro Mig_
uel lock Servizio Editoriale Fotografico
2. The Panama Canal route. This is a more recent
route which began to be used only in 1914 when the
Panama Canal was opened (Plate 30.C). Over half
of the shipping is domestic tralfic between the east
and west coasts of the U.S.A., but the canal has also
improved the trade of Caribbean countries like Mex-
ico, Cuba, Jamaica, Venezuela and the Central
American states as well as that of Colombia, Ecua-
dor, Peru and Chile. Goods handled are mainly oil,
cotton, coffee, ores and manufactured goods. It has
virtually replaced the long and arduous Cape Horn
route (Fig. 30.4).
3. The Trans-Pacific route. This route is the longest
in distance and has increasing significance in view of
the rapid economic development of western U.S.A.,
China, Japan, Australia and New Zealand. This
marathon sea route links Yokohama, Manila, Syd-
ney or Auckland with Vancouver, San Francisco or
Panama by way of Honolulu, Hawaii. The commod-
ities shipped are mainly grain (wheat), meat, dairy
products, wool and manufactured goods.
4. The Cape route. This is one of the oldest routes,
first sailed by Vasco da Gama on his voyage of dis-
covery to India. It was severely affected by the open-
ing of the Suez Canal when ships travelling between
Colombo and Southampton saved as much as
6 440 km (4,000 miles) by the Suez route. Now,
however, with the economic development of the
South African states and their production of min-
erals (gold, diamonds, copper), the volume of trade
along the Cape route has increased considerably.
Fig. 30.4 The Panama Canal
The outbreak of the Arab-Israeli conflict in 1967
forced the Suez Canal to be closed. It was a great
loss to the United Arab Republic in toll charges but
a tremendous gain for South Africa. To avoid canal
tolls, many shipping lines have already reverted to
the Cape route after 1967. As the Suez Canal was
not able to accommodate oil tankers over 20 000
tonnes, and many companies now use larger tankers
(up to 300 000 tonnes) they will have to use the Cape
route permanently even though the Canal has been
reopened.
5. The South Atlantic route. There is no important
east-west route between South America and South
Africa as you can see in Fig. 30.3. The largest vol-
ume of trade is between eastern Brazil and Argen-
tina (coffee, wheat, meat and dairy products) on the
one hand and Western Europe (industrial goods) on
the other. Much of the South American produce also
goes direct to the eastern U.S.A., particularly cof-
fee, of which the latter is the world's greatest
importer.
NOTE: The Suez Canal route which liirked Europe
with Asia, and carried bulky raw materials, oil and
manufactured goods since its opening in 1869 was
closed in 1967 because of the Arab-Isaeli war.
Although the Suez Canal is now open again and car-
ries a great deal of traffic, it can never regain its for-

mer strategic or economic importance, partly
because of political insecurity of the Middle East as
a whole and partly because of the larger tonpage of
today's shipping.
Summarizing the above pattern of the world's
ocean routes:
(a) The Suez route is the route of the past.
(b) The North and South Atlantic routes and Cape
route are the routes of the present (the peak of mod-
ern trade).
(c) The Trans-Pacific and Panama routes are the
routes of the future (excellent prospects for coun-
tries bordering them).
AIR TRANSPORT
This new form of transport has great advantages,
because it is little affected by ground conditions. An
aeroplane can cross mountains, dense forests and
large oceans with the greatest ease and speed. It can
reach the remotest, the farthest and the most inhos-
pitable places on earth provided a landing place is
available. Modern commercial air services operated
by large international airway corporations provide
prompt and efficient services to practically anywhere
on earth. Because of the speedy service, the airlines
are taking more and more of the passenger trade
from the much slower ocean liners.
There is a phenomenal growth in the world's aer-
ial transport of passengers, mail and freight. Many
parts of interior Africa, arid Australia and Arctic
Canada are heavily dependent on schduled and char-
tered air flights to link them with the outside world.
30.D The Flying Doctor in Australia Walkabout
Other forms of land and water-borne transport are
simply impracticable for geographical reasons. It is
often necessary to despatch urgently reqluired med'
ical supplies machine psrts or express mail to certain
isolated parts of the world, and the only way this can
be done isby plane. To overcome the difficulties of
finding a suitably long runway for the safe landing
of planes, more and more helicopters are being
used. It will not be long before air transport can be
made more economical for the general public. Many
Muslim pilgrims fly from Subang Airport, Kuala
Lumpur to fulfil their pilgrimage to Mecca. Much
time can be saved and inconvenience avoided.
But the development of air transport has been rather
unbalanced in different parts of the world. The den-
sest airline network is found in Western Europe and
North America, both internally and across the North
Atlantic. They are linked up with the rest of the
world, especially with the major capital cities of
Asia, South America, Africa and Australasia
(Fig. 30.s).
There are many factors that may prevent air trans-
port from being rapidly developed into a universal
form ofconveyance. Lack ofspace in aeroplanes will
restrict their use for freight to those companies
which can afford the high freight charges. Bulky
goods will still have to be transported by the con-
ventional means of conveyance; by sea, road or rail.
For passengers, as long as alternative and cheaper
forms of transport exist, the comfort and speed of
air transport will be confined to the more fortunate
minority.

I
iI
I
d;
A
s
F
Churchi!
#iL--t
Vancouve)
z-* 
a
Seattle
San
Francisca
wYerk - -
Q..'
\ " B.,mrd"
Los
Wake ls.
Kong
H6nolulu 
\I
/ 
Mexico City
Lr""", GambiT
Panama'
rgetown //
N+
I
Ouito
gglsrn lltonrovia-
Lima
/e
Reciie (
I
Rio de Janeiro
Fiii ry
x.t !
/l
Sao Paulo
I
I
I
Santiago
Durban
Buenos
Aires
Cape Town
Kc
-$
Scale 1: 215 000 000
Melbourne S
seE_'+g
ir"e")\,
..., -p
--'u//"n
-- - Major air routes
r Major air ports
Fig. 30.5 Major world air routes
In many developing countries, priority has to be
given to the development of land and sea transport
through which most of the nation's exports and
imports are channelled. The few existing air termi-
nals serve mainly the internal flights and do not have
adequate landing facilities and ground maintenance
services for the larger and more sophisticated
planes. Such modern planes have no choice but to
bypass the small local terminals and will not benefit
the people of these less developed countries. Tour-
ists, senior government servants, company execu-
tives and the wealthier citizens are those who benefit
most from the comfort and luxury of modern air
transport.
The freedom of the air is often interrupted by
countries who claim jurisdiction over the air space
above their territory. Alien planes who make use of
their air space will have to seek their permission to
do so and also pay a fee for landing rights. Countries
which are located at the strategic points of the earth
for air communication like Honolulu, Rome, Sin-
gapore and Tokyo stand to make great gains from
landing charges of international airlines. Close con-
trol must be exercised from ground stations over the
movements of planes in the air above to ensure max-
imum safety for air transport. With the use of super-
sonic planes and jumbo jets that fly at great speed
over heavily congested cities, especially over Europe
and North America, highly sophisticated equipment
has to be installed at all major air terminals to avoid
possible aerial collisions.
COMMUNICATIONS
'Communication' is not the same as transport as it
refers to the transmission of messages rather than
the physical carriage of goods and people. The ear-
liest form of communication was by word of mouth,
when messages were carried orally form one person
to another, which often led to distortion of infor-
mation since misinterpretation or exaggeration eas-
ily occurred in the process of transmission. Later on,
other devices were employed to convey the thoughts
and wishes of the people. Signals of all kinds were
tried out such as sounding gongs, ringing bells, blow-
ing whistles, flashing mirrors, or making smoke or
flag signals. They are still being used in everyday life
today in remote communities where other forms of
communication cannot be used.
The invention of writing marks a milestone in the
progress of communications as messages could then
be permanently recorded. The written messages were
transmitted over unlimited distances by hand, on
horseback and by road, rail or sea. The establish-
ment of post offices further facilitated and increased

the range of distance over which mail of all kinds
could be delivered in comparatively good time and
at a very small cost in the form of stamps. Wtih the
advent of telecommunications, messages and news
could be transmitted almost instantaneously simply
by the use of telegraphs, telephones, cable or the
telex system, by which written messages sent out
from one end of the world can be typed out at the
other end by a teleprinter.
The development of radio, later television, and
more recently space satellites marks the climax of
Man's effort in the science of telecommunications.
News read out at the BBC, London can be heard
simultaneously in any part of the globe by tuning to
the right wave-length on the radio sets. The moon
landing by the American astronauts was televised
'live' back to earth through the satellites to all parts
of the world. Men are being brought much closer to
one another through such useful mass media. They
have far reaching effects on every aspect of our daily
lives, be it trade. culture or entertainment. Televi-
sion allows pictures, advertisements and even school
lessons to be transmitted to the remotest parts of the
country. Whatever disasters, achievements or polit-
ical events that have taken place in one country can
be made known to the rest of the world almost
immediately. With the modern network of telecom-
munications, men live very close to one another
despite their separation by many kilometres of phys-
ical barriers.
Ouestions and Exercises
1. (a) State three ways in which goods produced
in one part of the world can reach con-
sumers a thousand kilometres away.
(b) Explain why the charges on transporting the
goods are dependent on such factors as:
i. the nature of the goods;
ii. the distance they are carried;
iii. the mode of transport.
2. Explain any three of the following:
(a) Freight charges need not be proportional to
distance.
(b) Inland water transport has its own limita-
tions.
(c) The North Atlantic sea route is the busiest
in the world.
(d) Most railways are owned by governments.
3. Give a comparative account of the Cape of
Good Hope and the Panama Canal routes under
the following headings:
(a) Some of the chief ports that each links.
Sample Objective Ouestions
1. Despite the rapid development in
modern air transport around the
world, its service is still confined to a
fraction of the population because
A people fear air disasters 
2.
B many countries do not have air-
lines
(b) The type of commodities that pass through
them.
(c) The trading nations they best serve.
Outline the advantages and disadvantages of
two of the following forms of transportation:
(a) inland waterways;
(b) railways;
(c) motor highways;
(d) air transport.
What do you understand by the following terms
connected with transport. Choose any four of.
them, explain their meaning and account for the
part they play in communications.
(a) standard gauge;
(b) passenger liner;
(c) tramps;
(d) air terminals;
(e) tankers;
(f) colliers;
(g) beasts of burden.
4.
5.
C other modes of transport are
more efficient
D it costs more to go by air
Rivers in their natural state may not
be useful as inland waterways for
these reasons except
they fluctudte in volume
large rivers may be silied at their
mouths
their navigability can never be
improved
their courses may be interrupted
by changes in gradient
A
B
c
D

3. The busiest and the most importanl 
A it cannot carry bulky commod- 
Yl dairyproducts
trans-oceanic route is the 
ities 
Which of the above commodities are
A North Atlantic Route 
B it consumes much petrol 
usually transported along the Trans-
B Cape of Good Hope Route 
C its carrying capacity is very li- 
Pacifc Route between the two sides
C Trans-paoific Route 
mited 
of the Pacific?
D panama Canal_Caribbean Route 
D it runs on fixed rails 
A Commodities I, V and VI
B Commodities I, II, IV and VI
4. Colliers are ships that specilize in 
7' The man-made canal which connects 
C Commodities I, IIl, IV and VI
the transportation of 
Lake Ontario to Lake Erie in the St. 
D Commodities II, III, tV and V
A coal 
Lawrence-Great Lakes Waterway is
B wheat 
the 
8. The multi-lane highways in West
C bananas 
A Soo Canal 
Germany are termed as
D oil 
B Erie Canal 
A autoroutes
C Welland Canal 
B autobahns
5. The busiest inland commercial 
D Rideau Canal 
C autostradss
waterway is the 
D motorways
A Mississippi River 
9. The following are some of the major
B Rhine River 
commodities that are transported 10. The greatest asset of air transporta-
C Indus River 
atong world shipping roules; 
tion is
D Murray-Darling River 
I ryheat 
A economy
II rice 
B security
6. The greatest disadvantage of rail 
III meat 
C speed
transport compared with other 
IV machinery 
D carrying capacity
means oftransport is that 
V coal

