Chapter 31 Settlements and Urbanization
A settlement may be defined as a group of buildings
with people living in them. It is a unit or organized
group of men, women and children making a living
out of their surrounding environment. These units
vary in size, complexity and stage of development.
There are always reasons why a group of people
should have chosen to live in a certain place. There
are even more reasons why one settlement should
grow from an isolated one-family farmstead to a
sizeable village, eventually becoming a town or even
a city.
You have been to many places, you have read
about some interesting towns and cities in your
geography books. Have you ever for a moment
thought to yourself how these settlements came into
being? You should, if the geography you have learnt
so far is to mean something to you. Geography
begins at home and the best place to start finding out
some interesting geographical facts is your own
hometown. It has almost everything that you want;
landscape, vegetation, rocks, soil, weather, houses,
buildings, roads and the various things that the local
people do, buy, sell and talk about. There is so much
that you can learn about geography from settle-
ments.
Types of settlement
Basically, there are only two main types of settle-
ment, dispersed and nucleated settlements.
l. Dispersed settlements. These are one-family or
a few-family residences scattered about in isolated
places. They are separated from one another by
open country or by geographical barriers (Fig. 31.1).
Life for the settlers is simple, quiet, and much the
Fig. 31.1 A dispersed settlement
Fig.31.2 A nucleated settlement
same all the year round. There is little opportunity
for social gatherings and even less for any spectac-
ular development. Dispersed settlement is most typ-
ical of rural areas. e.g. on the highlands of Malaysia,
the scrublands of central Australia, and the out-of-
the-way wheat farms in the Canadian Prairies.
2. Nucleated settlements. These are groupings of
several family residences. There are collective amen-
ities to serve the community like shophouses, mar-
kets, schools, places of worship and of entertainment
and a transport network. The settlement is compact,
concentrated and distinguishable by certain well
developed features (Fig. 31.2). Nucleated settle-
ments are called by different names according to
.their sizes and their functions. They may be village,
towns, ports or cities. Malaysian examples of nu-
cleated settlements are Sungai Sumum (a linear
village, with houses packed together on both sides
of the main Bagan Datoh Road), Teluk Intan (a
river-bend town), Port Kelang (a fast-developing
port) and Kuala Lumpur (a thriving city).
Location of settlements
A close look at the towns and cities shown in your
atlas, will reveal that they have certain advantages
-rOaOS
dE rivers
tlr 
viltages
% mile
0km8
0 mile 5
{$*n"
N
tl-
I
It,
r:i..-.1,
iir.:.J
Settlement
Mining Area
River& L
Road

\-Main Roads 
l\./f
;;il: l\
aD industrial Estates | 
)
\R"it*"y, 
I 
/
N _-'t
t\+€A
olr- Ar%
r 
'l
miles 15\
*'.i
!
LumDur !
i;;n \i
ri Besi 
i\I
.atang 
-)
1;...1t, ;.:iTaPadtfu
6 . Berri
0_k-.
0 miles 10
"%rc,est
'..: ,]':l.t: Padi
- 
rords
{++ railways
Fig. 31.3 Site of Kuala Lumpur
of site and position which have enabled them to
grow. The site of a town is its topographical location
in the immediate neighbourhood. Kuala Lumpur is
sited at the confluence of the Sungai Kelang and its
tributary the Gombak. Its position is its locational
situation in relation to the rest of the region. Kuala
Lumpur is situated in the 'rubber and tin belt' in cen-
tral Peninsular Malaysia. Fig. 31.3 shows the site of
Kuala Lumpur and Fig. 31.4 the position of Kuala
Lumpur. It is important not to confuse site with
position or situation.
Fig. 31.4 Position of Kuala Lumpur
Fig. 31.5 Alor Setar, on a fertile plain
The following are some of the more favrourable
combinations of site and situation which have led to
the establishment and growth of settlements.
l. Fertile alluvial plain. The basic requisites of
human existence are food and water. A fertile allu-
vial plain traversed by rivers is the best for raising
food crops and maintaining a secure water supply.
A level plain also facilities the movement of people
and goods. It is an ideal situation for the exchange
of products and ideas. It is the potential centre for
trade, communication and administration. Examples
are Alur Setar on the fertile Kedah Plain, drained by
the Sungai Kedah (Fig. 31.5 and Plate 31.A), Nanj-
ing (Nanking) on the rich Chang Jiang (Yangtze)
Plain of Central China, and Paris in the intensively
cultivated Paris basin drained by the River Seine.
2. Coastal lowlands. Where narrow coastal plains
are bounded on the landward side by mountains,
agriculture, transport and settlement have all to be
concentrated on the lower land. Where there is a
route through the mountain barrier, this naturally
leads to the growth of a town. Examples include
Taiping on the Larut Plain at the foot of Maxwell
Hill, part of the Gunung Bintang Range, about
16 km (10 miles) from the coast. Trondheim lies on
the fertile lowland of the Trondheim Fiord, bounded
inland by the Scandinavian Mountains (Fig. 31.6)
and Durban on the coastal plain at the foot of the
Drakensberg is another example.
3. Sheltered indentations on the coastline. An
THAI LAND
I t- 
a.o
0 miles 50
E
+at?,
a
Land over
183 m (@O feetl
Railways
Roads
Major towns

0km80
.^o
o mites u0 a*y'r$:
rw:
# 
*t""i
ill.ftl r,rrin uuirt-
.:+-..uparl
i$-{ii*fr suburbs
--- 
road
+H+r- railways ffi 
ttlsttt.na
Fig. 31.6 Trondheim, on a fiorded coastal lowland
indented coastline has calm waters and is sheltered
from the waves of the open sea. It is particularly
well-suited for a seaport where off-shore islands
offer an added protection. Examples includes Sin-
gapore whose wharves and dockyards (Keppel Har-
31.A Alur Setar, sited at a bend of a river and situated in the
fertife Kedah Plain Jabatan Penerangan Malaysia
Fig. 31.7 Singapore, on a sheltered port
bour, Empire Dock, East, West, and Main
Wharves) are well sheltered in a curved bay, pro-
tected by Pulau Brani and Pulau Sentosa (Fig. 31.7).
Melbourne is ideally sited on Port Phillip Bay and
protected by protruding headlands on both sides of
the entrance to form one of the best sheltered nat-
ural harbours of the southern hemisphere. Tokyo is
located at the end of the sheltered Tokyo Bay. A
dredge channel enables ships of over L0 000 tonnes
l"- ' s:,r';

Milwaukee
n to Duluth a.|d PRAIRIES
? | 
ro Attaniic o@n
\ll
/ 
ll 
r.ko Michisln
\ llen
I o;ll
I 
gll
I 
ll lrom Duluth and PRAIRIE
t 
lf 
rrom Atlantic ocan 
l
0km80
o-miles 50
Fig. 31.8 Chicago, a nodal town
to reach Tokyo itself, though the large ocean liners
and tramps prefer to call at its outport, Yokohama,
32 km (20 miles) away.
4. A natural focus of routes. These are the nodal
towns. By virtue of their geographical location in
relation to the region, many towns assume promi-
nence as centres of road, rail or water communica-
tion. People congregate to provide commerical and
social services that passing tt'avellers can make use
of. Examples of such nodal towns include Bidor
whose function is more as an intermediate
route junction between two state capitals, Ipoh in
the north, and Kuala Lumpur in the south. Chicago
is an ideally located route town in the Mid-West of
the U.S.A. (Fig. 31.8). Road and rail routes converge
on Chicago from the west, east and south while
water routes on Lake Michigan lead north, and give
it an outlet to the Atlantic via the Great Lakes.
Crewe is a central location for the railways of Brit-
ain. It is the greatest main-line railway junction of
the country.
5. Sites for generating hydro-electric power.
Waterfalls are natural sites for generating hydro-
electricity. Where such a site occurs, the avail-
ability of cheap power attracts industrial concerns.
These require labour and provisions, and a set-
tlement is very likely to grow up, taking advan-
tage of the cheap power. Examples include Buffalo
south of the Niagara Falls, which is an example of
Fig. 31.9 Buffalo, at the top of Niagara Falls
the growth of a large city associated with the devel-
opment of H.E.P. (Fig. 31.9) and Trollhattan, a
Swedish town. Trollhattan, which is linked by rail to
Goteborg, the premier port of Scandinavia, owes
much of its recent growth to the H.E.P. works of the
Trollhattan Falls-'the Niagara of Sweden'. Killaloe
on the River Shannon in Ireland once supplied the
whole country with electricity. There are now many
other producers but electrical transmission lines
from Killaloe still bring light and heat to many Irish
farms and homes.
6. By the side of lakes. Lakes provide fish, water
and a means of inland transport. Some of the best
known tourist centres are located on or near lakes
because of their scenic beauty and recreational facil-
ities. Examples of lakeside towns include Como, one
of the most frequented tourist resorts of Europe,
located close to Lake Como, Italy whose scenic
beauty and proximity to the Alps made it a popular
base from which to explore the Alps. Entebbe is a
lakeside town of Lake Victoria (Fig. 31.10) whose
importance is further enhanced by its proximity to
the Ugandan capital, Kampala. Salt Lake City, sit-
uated near the Great Salt Lake of Utah, is one of
the largest nucleated settlements in the Rocky
Mountains. It is at a height of 1 200 metres (4,000
feet) above sea-level.
7. Mineral wealth. Many settlements have grown
to considerable size purely because of the presence
of minerals. Even in the desert or high in the moun-
tains valuable minerals will attract investors and men
to work in the mines. Examples include Johannes-
burg, the 'Golden City', whose growth was initiated
by the discovery of gold in the Witwatersrand Plate

KENYA
LAKE
VICTORIA
Fig. 31.10 Entebbe, a lakeside town
31.8 Johannesburg,South
31.C). It has expanded so fast that it is now the cap-
ital of Transvaal, the second largest city of Africa
after Cairo, and the rail and road focus of South
Africa. Kiruna was founded when rich magnetite
iron ore was discovered in northern Sweden. Kiruna,
together with Gallivare, produces more iron than
any part of the Scandinavian peninsula. Because of
its northerly location, its importance will always be
confined to that of a mining settlement lpoh, 'the
town that tin built', has experienced phenomenal
growth since tin was discovered in the Kinta Valley
a century ago. It has expanded from a tin trading
centre for the Kinta Valley to being the administra-
tive capital of Perak today (Fig. 31.11).
E. Good site for defence. This was a deciding fac-
tor in ancient times when defensive strategy, exe-
cuted at the right moment, could save the whole
community. However, in modern warfare with aerial
attacks, even New York or Moscow could not be
saved. Some of the older towns that grew up on
defensive sites include Beijing (Peking), the ancient
and present capital of China, and a well fortified
town. The Great Wall of China formed the first line
of defence against the barbarian invaders from the
north (Fig. 31.12). Today, the city is still surrounded
by a series of walls that once shut out invaders.
Edinburgh, the strategic capital of Scotland was
once a fortress that commanded the important
routes of the Central Valley. Edinburgh Castle,
standing on a rocky crag, is a reminder of the town's
taif ings from gold mines in the background. Camera press
Fig.31.11 lpoh, a tin-mining town
- 
roads
*1+ railways
ffi nbnrno
$ 
tin

ffi 
tticht"td
9kmg0
miles 50
Fig. 31.14 Orleans, on a river bend
t\ 
a^^ *",,,
Fig. 31.12 Beijing (Peking) a defensible site
military significance in the past. Rome located on the
Tiber River and the seven hills was the ancient
Roman capital of the world. Castles and fortresses
were built on the many small hills to defend parts of
the city. Today, it contains the Vatican, ecclesiastical
capital of the Roman Catholic world and is the cap-
ital of Italy, but its economic importance has slipped
well behind that of industrial Milan in the north.
9. River-borne sites. These include a vast number
of sites carved out by a river on its course from source
to mouth.
(a) Where a river passes through a gap.This is
the lowest part of the region and it naturally carries
many road and railway routes, e.g. Shenyang (Muk-
den) in Manchuria (China), Lincoln on the River
Witham (U.K.), Toulouse (Fig. 31.13) on the River
Gar6nne (France).
Fig. 31.13 Toulose (France), a gap town
Fig. 31.15 Khartoum. on a confluence town
(b) Where a river bends or meanders. A town
may take advantage of a change in the river's direc-
tion of flow, e.g. Teluk Intan on Sungai Perak,
Orleans (Fig. 31.1a) on the River Loire; or a town
may be sited on the inside of a bend, a defensive site
almost surrounded by water, e.g. Durham, England.
(c) Where two rivers meet (confluence town). The
volume of the river increases when two streams
merge into one. The navigability of the river is
increased and a town may grow, e.g. Temerloh, at
the confluence of Sungai Pahang and Sungai Seman-
tan; St. Louis, at the confluence of the Mississippi
and Missouri; Khartoum (Fig. 31.15) at the meeting
of the Blue and White Nile.
(d) Where a river enters or leaves a lake on is
course A town may take advantage of being near
; ', dens€ly
- '- populated rea
miles 
2OO
3r7

okm66
0 miles 4A
NORTH SEA
WEST
GERMANY
Bremen
,r-\
km 
1OO 're^
O 
miles 
Fig.31.16 Geneva, where a river leaves a lake
two sources of water and two lines of communica-
tion, the river and the lake, e.g. Geneva (Fig. 31.16)
where the River Rh6ne leaves Lake Geneva; Duluth
where the small St. Louis River enters Lake Supe-
rior: Detroit. where the St. Clair River enters Lake
Erie.
(e) Where a river enters or leaves a gorge. The
gorge itself is too steep for any large settlement, but
at the points where the river enters or leaves the
gorge, the valley widens and there are better sites
for settlements, e.g. Bingen, where the Rhine enters
the Rhine Gorge, Bonn, where the Rhine leaves the
Fig.31.17 Bingen and Bonn, at either end of the Rhine
Gorge
Fig. 31.18 Bremen and Hamburg and their outport
Gorge (Fig. 31.17); Linz, where the Danube enters
its gorge and Vienna, where the Danube leaves the
gorge.
(t) The limit of river navigation or the head of
ocean navigation. The point where the river
becomes too shallow for river steamers to go any
further upstream or the point where high steamers
begin sailing downstream towards the ocean, are
important points. Large settlements in the form of
river ports are located there, e.g. Wuchang on the
Chang Jiang (Yangtze Kiang) and Oxford on the
Thames are river ports at the limit of river naviga-
tion. Bremerhaven (Fig. 31.18) on the Weser and
Rouen on the Seine, are river ports at the head of
ocean navigation.
(g) Fording or bridging point on a river. At a
point where a river can be forded or bridged a town
may grow up to take advantage of this improvement
in communications, e.g. Bedford on the Great Ouse,
England; London, the'lowest bridging point'on the
Thames.
Functions of Settlements
All settlements perform certain useful functions to
justify their continued existence. Most of them have
several functions. A village may just serve the com-
munity as a meeting place for people and goods and
have no other outstanding functions to distinguish
it from the neighbouring villages. But as a village
grows into a town and later into a city, the increase
in population alone warrants many actiyities that a

village does not require. These activities lead to cer-
tain specializations that differentiate one from the
others. London with its nine million people has
many functions. It is an administrative centre (being
capital of the United Kingdom), a port (with highly
specialized docks and wharves), a financial centre
(the Bank of England is the central bank of the
Sterling Area), and industrial centre (some highly
sophisticated luxury goods are made here) and a cul-
tural centre (with the University of London, art gal-
leries, museums and theatres). But most towns have
one dominant function. We can therefore classify
towns according to their functions.
l. Market towns. These towns act as centres of
exchange. They are collection and distribution
centres for local products. The mere fact that a town
lies in a densely populated district or in an agricul-
tural region necessitates its function as a town of
commodity distribution, e.g. Seremban (Malaysia),
Kumasi (Ghana), Norwich (U.K.).
2. Industrial towns. These are towns that are pri-
marily concerned with the processing of raw mate-
rials into manufactured goods. They normally have
certain advantages as industrial sites, such as prox-
imity to power, minerals, raw materials, labour or
markets and are well served by a good network of
communications. They may be towns specializing in
textiles (Leeds, U.K.), chemical (Remscheid, West
Germany), or steel (Pittsburgh, U.S.A.).
3. Commercial towns. These are centres of com-
merce and finance, where trade is the primary con-
cern. There are established facilities for banking,
insurance and other commerical interests. London
is the financial headquarters of the Commonwealth.
New York, with business concentrated on Wall
Street, is the financial centre of the U.S.A. Zurich
and Frankfurt are also financial centres.
4. Mining towns. The mining towns can be
located in very unusual places provided there are
sufficient mineral resources. Some of the more out-
standing mining towns are Newcastle, U.K. (coal),
Sudbury, Canada (nickel), Magnitogorsk, U. S.S.R.
(iron), Kalgoorlie, Australia (gold), Chuquicamata,
Chile (copper), Anshan, Manchuria (iron), Potosi,
Bolivia (tin). With the exhaustion of the minerals,
some of these settlements shrink. Many acquire
other functions and are permanent towns.
5. Administrative towns. These are the head-
quarters of the government and they are capital cit-
ies or centres of local administration. They deal with
the organization and administration of the nation or
of a division within the country. Some capitals are
Geneva (international capital but not the capital of
Switzerland), Washington D.C. (capital of the
U.S.A.), Canberra (the planned capital of Aus-
tralia), Brasilia (the capital of Brazil, noted for its
bold modern architecture) and Islamabad (the new
capital of the Islamic Republic of Pakistan).
6. Cultural and educational towns. These are
towns in which are found world renowned univers-
ities, e.g. Oxford, Cambridge and London in U.K.,
Heidelberg in the Netherlands.
7. Ecclesiastical towns. The towns under this cat-
egory are very special. They are historical and reli-
gious centres and are frequented by pilgrims from
all parts of the globe. Such ecclesiastical towns
include Jerusalem, (Judaism, Christianity), Mecca
(Islam), Varanasi (Hinduism). There are other
smaller ones which have religious associations of
some kind or have important shrines. e.g. Canter'
bury (U.K.), Lourdes (France).
8. Royal towns. These are the traditional resi-
dences of monarchs, kings and queens, sultans and
their consorts. They may have beautiful palaces and
are visited by foreign dignitaries, e.g. Copenhagen
(Denmark) Luang Prabang (Laos) and Kuala Kang-
sar (the residence of His Highness, the Sultan of
Perak).
9. Holiday resorts, hill resorts and health
resorts. Various kinds of resorts are located in
favourable geographical surroundings. They include
31.C St. Moritz, Switzerland, a popular winter sports resort
is sited near ski sf opes and a lake. Servizio Editoriale Fotogra-
fico

coastal resorts for bathing and yatching, e.g. Brigh-
ton (U.K.), Miami (U.S.A.); hill resorts for moun-
tain climbing and for the cool mountain air. e.g.
Grindelwald, Moritz (Plate 31.D) (Switzerland),
Innsbruck (Austria), Tanah Rata, Cameron High-
lands (Malaysia); health resorts for those who need
specialists' treatment, e.g. Baden Baden (Germany);
Bath (U.K.).
10. Ports. These are berthing places for steamers
and river craft and usually have deep waters, ware-
houses and international transport arrangements,
including customs offices and banking and. insurance
services. They can be sub-divided into the following.
(a). Seaports. These are the large ocean termi-
nals with all the essential port facilities to accomo-
date cargoes and passengers, e.g. Southampton,
Marseilles, Hong Kong, Yokohama, Auckland,
Honolulu.
(b). Entrepdts. These are ports that specialize in
receiving and redistributing goods to the neighbour-
ing countries and to all corners of the world, e.g.
Singapore, Colombo, Rotterdam, (Plate 31.E).
(c). Packet-stations. These are ferry-terminals on
an international scale. They deal with goods and pas-
sengers crossing channels and seas, e.g. Calais
(France), Ostend (Belgium), Folkstone (U.K.).
(d). Outports. These are smaller ports closer to
deep ocean waters and serve a larger port further
inland which can no longer be reached by the largest
31.D Rotterdam one of the largest European ports is sited
at the mouth of the Rhine. Servizio Editoriale Fotografico
31.E Petaling Jaya, a well-planned satellite town designed
for residential and light industry purposes Jabatan Pener-
angan Malaysia
ships, e.g. Fremantle serves Perth; Lyttleton serves
Christchurch, Cuxhaven serves Hamburg (Fig. 31.18).
(e). River porrs. These are ports which can be
reached by smaller steamers on the lower course
of a river, e.g. Duisburg (W. Germany), Rouen
(France), Manaus (Brazil).
(f). Fishing ports. Here the predominant port
acitivity is the handling of fish, with storage, proc-
essing and packing facilities, e.g. Yarmouth and
Grimsby (U.K.), Lorient (France), Bergen (Nor-
way), Kuala Besut (Trengganu, Malaysia).
(g). Residential or satellite towns. These are
modern towns which have been specially developed
to accommodate urban people, who wish to reside
in more healthy and spacious surroundings away
from the city centre. These towns often include
industrial estates for light industries, e.g. Crawley,
United Kingdom serving congested London; Val-
lingby outside Stockholm; and Petaling Jaya near
Kuala Lumpur (Plate 31.F); and Toa Payoh in
Singapore.
Town Growth
Settlements grow in size and complexity with the
passage of time. In fact, all present-day large cities
were once villages or small towns, and their growth
to urban status is due to a combination of factors.

31.F Kano. a caravan town in Nigeria Poppertoto
All settlements are nuclei of population concentra-
tion, and each succeeding generation adds to the
number of people merely by natural increase besides
those who drift in from surrounding rural areas. Iir
recent years, many towns have experienced a rapid
population increase from large numbers of people
who flock into towns for one reason or another. 'The
lure of the town' is probably one of the greatest rea-
sons. Large towns and cities all over the world seem
to be places of great excitement to rural folk, with
many attractions that make life worth living. Many
move in from distant villages without any idea of
how they are going to make a living and end up with
problems, for themselves and the urban authorities
concerned. It cannot be denied that employment
opportunities are far greater in towns than in villages
whether in shops, offices, factories, entertainment
or other public services, but one must remember
that the number of people competing for those jobs
is proportionally great. Unless towns can grow at a
rate which provides enough job opportunities to
match the influx of migrants from the countryside,
unemployment and urban congestion are bound to
arise. At the same time problems are sometimes cre-
ated in rural areas when 'rural depopulation' leads
to abandoned farms and scarcity of farm labour.
Apart from local migrants, the numbers of people
in towns and cities are also swelled by immigrants
from other countries. The ratio of urban-rural pop-
ulation in most countries since the beginning of this
century has gone up more than 25 per cent. In Aus-
tralia, for example, for every 4 persons, 3 live in
towns!
Urbanization and lts Problems
The growth of towns in human numbers lead directly
to the areal expansion of the town limits. The sur-
rounding agricultural land is gradually taken over by
urban structures and factory sites. The wealthier
people have to move further and further out into the
countryside to build their suburban homes to enjoy
the open space and fresh air which are so lacking in
the urban areas. Where the pressure of population
on available housing is great, as in many crowded
Asian cities, squatters move into the unused subur-
ban spaces and build makeshift shacks which present
great problems to urban development plans. Despite
government efforts to resettle squatters in flats in
modern multi-storeyed housing blocks as in Singa-
pore, Hong Kong, Bombay and New york, slum
dwellers are still found around most of the world's
cities.
In advanced countries the rapidly growing cities
spread in all directions. The suburban areas extend
especially along the main roads that lead into the
cities. Industrial sites have to move further and fur-
ther away from the urban hearts, drawing labour
force from the urban districts as well as from the
nearby villages. At the same time the villages and
towns that lie within commuting distance of the cities
will also be gradually developed either into residen-
tial quarters or industrial towns. They tend to grow
and expand towards each other till they eventually
merge as a continuous urban or industrial belt
known as 'conurbatrbn'. Such mergers of many
towns are very common in the developed countries,
e.g. the Midlands of England where towns like Bir-
mingham, Wolverhampton, Walsall, Oldbury, Wil-
lenhall, etc. form the well-known conurbation-the
'Black Country'. Similar kinds of conurbation are
found in the Great Lakes-St. Lawrence region of
Canada, the Eastern seaboard of the U.S.A. (Meg-
alopolis) and the Ruhr-Westphalia region of West
Germany. In the years to come, the expanding sub-
urbs and industrial estates of Kuala Lumpur may
eventually merge with those of Petaling Jaya, Sungei
Way, Batu Tiga, Shah Alam, and Port Kelang to
form a great conurbation.
Urbanization caused by the combined expansion
of population and urban area poses many problems.
1. Unemployment. Unless urban growth can keep
pace with the commercial and industrial develop-
ment, many people will not be gainfully employed
in the cities. The urban authorities have to be con-
stantly on the watch for development opportunities
32r

by offering attractive terms and economic stability
for foreign investors to channel their investments in
the city and suburban areas. Facilities should alsci be
created to teach the people the various skills in the
industrial and commercial fields so that the investors
can be assured of the right poeple to make their
investments grow. The widespread unemployment
in many congested cities of the world can be a threat
to the economic and social well-being of a country.
2. Housing. In a congested city, housing can be an
acute problem. Scarcity of living accommodation
can push up rental rates to exorbitant heights, as has
happened in New York, London and even Singapore
today. Over-congested living quarters can be a
health hazard especially in slums and squatter areas.
The scarcity of land and the exorbitant land prices
have necessitated the construction of multi-storey
flats and sky-scraper office blocks. The independent,
single or semi-detached bungalow-type residential
houses that we so commonly see in the countryside
are a real luxury in large cities!
3. Traffic congestion. Large cities, with their mil-
lions of inhabitants who have to live, work and move
about, invariably suffer from congestion on roads.
AII kinds of conveyances: cars, buses, trams, trucks,
railways, motorcycles and bicycles jam the transport
31.G An aerial view of Tokyo, the largest city in the world
lnternational Society for Educational lnformation
network and slow down movement. This is particu-
larly serious during the rush hours in the morning,
lunch breaks and after office hours, as well as in
the evenings where there are again many people on
the streets going to restaurants and cinemas, etc.
Public transport systems are crammed to capacity
and parking problems can be a nerve-racking expe-
rience especially when one is in a hurry to reach the
office or to keep an appointment. Many car-owners
in congested cities prefer to abandon their vehicles
and catch a taxi, bus or underground train to reach
the city centre.
4. Environmental deterioration. Overcrowding al-
ways leads to a drop in living standards. A large
population in a small area puts a tremendous pres-
sure on such everyday matters as the disposal of sew-
age and garbage, and the provision of water supply,
electricity, social and recreational amenities. Smoke
from kitchens, factories and cars pollutes the air and
increases health hazards. The noise from the traffic
and the industrial sites is often excessive and makes
town-life unpleasant. With the increase in the urban
sprawl, the natural beauty of the landscape is spoilt.
Green fields have to give way to housing and indus-
try. Environmental deterioration is a major problem
in all highly developed urban areas. (Plate 31.G)

Ouestions and Exercises
1. Either: Distinguish the differences between
dispersed and nucleated settlements, giving
examples wherever you can.
Or: State the difference between site and sit-
uation by drawing sketch maps of towns that
you know.
2. With the aid of sketch maps show specific
examples of the following types of towns:
(a) nodal town;
(b) confluence town;
(c) gap town;
(d) satellite town.
3. State the geographical factors which have led
to the growth of any four of the following
towns. (Sketch maps are essential.).
(a) Marseilles
(b) Chicago
(c) Maracaibo
(d) Vladivostlk
(e) Los Angeles
(f) Kuala Lumpur
(g) Sydney
(h) Johannesburg
4. Explain any three of the following terms con-
nected with settlements:
(a) conurbation;
(b) rural depopulation;
(c) outports;
(d) linear settlement;
(e) hinterland.
5. Either: Describe some of the favourable loca-
tions for the siting of towns.
Or: Give a reasoned classification of towns
based on any one method that is familiar to
you.
6. (a) Why are towns continuously growing both
in population and size?
(b) Name three towns which have grown very
rapidly in the past decade.
(c) Discuss the problems that are posed by
fast-growing towns.
(d) What attempts are being made to combat
these problems?
(a) Attempt to classify the different types of
ports.
(b) Name three types of ports. Give an example
for each type you have named and state the
main functions of each example.
(c) What type of port would you say each of
the following is?
i. Singapore
ii. Fremantle
iii. Southampton
iv. Calais
v. Hakodate
vi. Manus
(a) Describe the site and situation of Tokyo.
(b) Give an example each of a town which is
sited on the following:
i. river confluence;
ii. sheltered indented coastline:
iii. railway focus;
iv. lake-side:
v. foot of a hill:
vi. a gap.
(c) For any two of the towns you named in (b),
draw maps to illustrate their sites and sug-
gest reasons for their growth and impor-
tance.
Explain any three of the following:
(a) Many capital cities have a central location.
(b) Many important ports are also large
industrial centres.
(c) The greatest number of 'million cities' are
located in Asia.
(d) Many large cities in the developing coun-
tries are of relatively recent origin.
(e) Large cities have various functions.
(a) What do you understand by the term 'pol-
lution'?
(b) Why is pollution a serious problem in
heavily industrialized cities?
(c) What other types of 'pollution' may be
expected in large cities?
(d) What measures can be taken to combat
pollution in cities?
8.
9.
10.

Sample Objective Ouestions
1. The growth of cities leads to the ex- 
4. Darwin in northern Australia is an 
C environmental deterioration
pansion of areas as well as popula- 
example of a town that has recently 
D a lowering of the cost of living
tion. Their consequences are re- 
suffered very badly from
flected in the following ercepr 
A un uncontrollable bush-fire 
8. Southampton in the United King-
A the deterioration of urban sur- 
B a disastrous earthquake 
dom is a typical
roundings 
C a prolonged drought 
A naval port
B the lower cost of living 
D a typhoon 
B entrep6t port
C the higher rental charges 
C passenger port
D theincreasedrateof crimes 
5. Queenstown which is in the South 
D ferryport
Island of New Zealand is important
2. Rivers on their course from source 
because it is 
9. Towns may decline for various
to mouth may carve out sites that 
A a tourist resort 
reasons. Which of the following is
lead to the growth of settlements. 
B a mining site 
largely responsible for the decline of
Which of the following descriptions 
C an industrial town 
Hiroshima in Japan?
of river sites is applicable to Gene- 
D a cultural centre 
A excessive silting at the river
va, Switzerland? 
mouth
A where a river enters a gorge 
6. The greatest number of 'million 
B the decline of industrial output
B where a river passes through a 
cities' is found in 
C as a result of natural disaster
gap 
A Europe 
D destruction by war
C where a river leaves a lake 
B Asia
D where two rivers meet 
C Africa 
10. From the list of the major port cities
D North America 
of the world given below, select one
3. Towns may decline for these reasons 
which is not served by an output.
except 
7. Problems arising from urbanization 
A Hamburg
A diversion of the main route. 
include the following except 
B Colombo
B depletion of mineral deposits 
A air pollution 
C Perth
C'closure of factories 
B traffic consestion 
D Bristol
D urban drift

