Chapter 29 World Population
Size and Growth of World Population
The map in Fig.29.1 shows the general pattern and
density of the world's population distribution. Esti-
mates in 1977 show that the world has no less than
4 105 million people. This is an alarming figure, for
all these people have to be adequately fed, clothed,
housed, educated and cared for. The problems they
pose are no longer just the study of the demographic
experts, they are the concern of everyone, every-
where! In the past when total human numbers were
small, and the death rate (mortality rate) was high,
the annual increase in population was relatively
small. Today, with such a huge number as 4.1 billion
and lower mortality rates in most parts of the world,
the increase is becoming greater every year. In the
last 70 years, the world population has almost tre-
bled. We can see from Fig. 29.2that although it took
many thousands of years to reach a billion and a
half, it took a little more than half a century to more
Fig. 29.1 World population distribution
than double that number. The United Nations esti-
mate of an average increase of 1.5 per cent (or 1.5
per thousand) per annum means that the world will
have 6 650 000 000 people by the end ofthis century
(2 000 A.D.).
The fact that population increases in geometrical
progression (i.e. 2, 4, 8, 16, 32, 64, 128,...,) has
worried Man since the time of Thomas R. Malthus
(1766-1834), a British clergyman and political eco-
nomist, who noted with dismay that Man would one
day reach a starvation level when food production
would fail to keep up with population increase. For-
tunately this pessimistic outlook has been modified
by three developments which Malthus did not fore-
see.
1. The advances made in technology and industry.
2. The mechanization and intensification of agricul-
tural production.
3. The practice of family planning or birth control.
Considering that more than half the human race

Fig.29.2 World population growth
is malnourished (underfed too!) at present there is
no guarantee that Malthus' predictions may not yet
take place. Famine is already too common in many
parts of the globe. All countries struggle to keep
food production abreast with population increase.
International trading data show that more and more
nations have to import food. Of all the rice-produc-
ing countries in Asia, only Burma, Thailand and the
Philippines have any surplus for export (only
between 3 and 5 per cent of the world's rice pro-
duction enters international trade). At their present
rates of population increase (ranging from 1.5 to 3.2
per cent), even the few rice and wheat exporters may
soon have very little left to spare the others. For
instance, from the Second World War until 1952.
world population increased by 12 per cent. In the
same period world food production increased by
only 9 per cent.
Fortunately, with the immense power of modern
applied science at his disposal, Man has so far been
able to avert the impending disaster. Food yields
have been raised, new sources of food have been
introduced and effective measures have been taken
to conserve food, fuel and other natural resources,
so that the scarcity of food is less acute. But how
long will this last, and how far can science combat
the problems that arise if the world population dou-
bles in every half a century? These are some of the
problems that Man must be prepared to face and
solve.
World Population Distribution
Apart from their rapid rate of increase, human
beings are also very unevenly distributed, which
leads to the problem of overpopulation.*
Less than 2O per cent of the world's surface is hab-
itable, and within this area are striking contrasts in
population density. Some areas are very densely
populated, e.g. Singapore Island has an average den-
sity of 4 000 people per sq. kny'lO 300 people per
square mile (area: 585 sq. kml255 sq. mile, popu-
lation: 2.4 million), while Australia has less than 2
people to the square km/4 people to the square mile
(area:7.7 million square km/3 million square miles,
population: 15 million). Generally speaking, about
half the world's land surface is uninhabited, a
quarter is sparsely populated and the remainder is
more densely populated. There are many geograph-
ical factors which influence population densities and
their pattern of distribution.
l. Climate. This is probably the greatest deciding
factor, which in turn influences the type of vegetation
(desert, grassland or forest), the kinds of crops that
can be cultivated, the animal kingdom and the over-
all suitability of the region for human habitation.
2. Physical relief. From your regional studies of the
world, you should have already noticed that most of
the lowlands and river valleys suiport the greatest
number of people. Their levelness leads to ease of
communications, cultivation and overall develop-
ment. The world's most densely populated districts
are, in fact, the coastal plains and the basins and
alluvial deltas of great rivers, that are usually served
by a good network of communications. The mouri-
tainous interiors, unless they are rich in minerals, are
very sparsely inhabited. Even if they have some min-
* Overpopulation is a relative term used to refer to an area where
its natural resources and the technical competence of its people
can no longer support its inhabitants comfortably. A few nomads
per square kilometres in the arid Middle East may be considered
overpopulated, but 192 persons per square Kilometre (500 per-
sons p€r square mile) in the industrial Midlands, United Kingdom
may not be so.
A.D.1 1650 1750 1850 1900 1950 1970 2000
29s

erals, their altitude and difficulties in communica-
tions reduce their capacity for population. The few
mining communities may be separated from one
another by high mountains, or dense forests.
3. Soils. This is a factor which is usually closely
related to climate, though not always. A well-devel-
oped, mature soil in either the tropics or the tem-
perate regions with a fair balance of precipitation
and evaporation is suitable for agriculture, which in
turn supports the peasant population. The soils of
the temperate deciduous forests and those of the
tropical monsoon lands are intensively tilled and
support large populations. Excessive leaching in the
equatorial regions, intense evaporation in the
deserts and perpetual freezing in the polar regions
impoverish the soil. These areas are therefore
sparsely populated. Soils that are independent of
local climatic causes such as the fertile volcanic soils,
alluvial soils, aeolian (wind-blown) loess and glacial
soils (boulder clay) are suitable for agriculture and
support dense populations.
4. Mineral reources. Mineral deposits are very
unevenly scattered over the globe. Their presence
in commercially exploitable quantities either in the
form of metallic ores (e.g. tin, copper, zinc, lead,
aluminium, iron) or fuel (coal, petroleum) is a vital
factor in the location of industries which in turn sup-
port a high population density.
5. Other minor factors. These usually affect only
limited areas and are of varying significance. They
include government policy in immigration and redis-
tribution of settlers, and other factors which may be
historical, cultural, social. economic or medical.
The Pattern of World Population
Distribulion
Having analysed the various factors which influence
population densities, we shall now examine more
closely with the aid of Fig.29.1. the pattern of the
world's population distribution.
1. The very sparsely populated parts of the
world. These include the cold polar lands of the
Arctic and Antarctic, the Canadian and Eurasian
tundra, Greenland and the high mountains of the
Himalayas, the Rockies and parts of the Andes. The
hot deserts, of the Kalahari, the Atacama, the
Sahara, the Great Australian Desert, the Mohave
and other deserts in the U.S.A. and Mexico, and the
Middle East arid lands are all sparsely populated.
Within the tropics are large, virtually uninhabited
jungles and rain forests like the Amazon basin, the
Zaire basin and the interiors of some of the South-
East Asian islands.
2. The moderately populated parts of the world. This
covers large areas of the cool temperate forests, the
taiga of Eurasia and the Canadian coniferous for-
ests. Lumbering districts normally do not need many
people. But if the forests are cleared for arable farm-
ing, population may be larger. Similarly, in the tem-
perate and tropical grasslands where pastoralism and
large-scale mechanized farming predominate, only
a moderate population is found. These include the
southern U.S.S.R. (steppes), the American and
Canadian Prairies, and the grasslands of the south-
ern continents. The rest of the agricultural U.S.A.,
Mediterranean Europe, Africa and most parts of
South-East Asia may also be classed as moderately
populated, except for pockets of high pouplation
density caused by local factors.
3. The very densely populated parts of the
world. These are found in the industrial West and
the agricultural East and include:
(a) Industrial North-West Europe. Here are
found the most advanced and the most heavily indus-
trialized countries of the world: Great Britain,
France, West Germany, Benelux and Denmark.
Reasons for their very high population densities will
be dealt with later.
(b) Industrial north-eastern U.S.A. This is the
great industrial belt of the United States and Canada
stretching from the shores of the Great Lakes
through Pittsburgh to New York and the Atlantic
seaboard. The density decreases gradually south-
wards and westwards into the agricultural areas of
the Mississippi basin and the Gulf states.
(c) Agricultural Monsoon Asia. This is the largest
area of continuous high population density. It
includes populous countries as China, Japan, India,
Bangladesh, Sri Lanka, Indonesia (Java particu-
larly) and the coastal plains and deltaic regions of
continental and insular South-East Asia. The fertile
alluvial soils of the Huang He (Hwang Ho), Chang
Jiang (Yangtze Kiang) and Xi Jiang (Si Kiang) of
China; the Indo-Gangetic Plain of Indo-Pakistan
and Bangladesh; the rice-bowls of the Irrawaddy
delta, the Chao Phraya basin, the Red and Mekong
deltas, together with the rich volcanic soils of Java
and the Philippines and industrial Japan, support
almost half the human race. In no part of the world
is the land so intensively tilled and people so closely
packed together as in these parts of Monsoon Asia.
(d) The Nile valley and delta. This is another area
of unusually high density, and has been so since the

establishment of the Egyptian civilization. The
waters of the Nile have converted this part of the
barren Sahara Desert into fertile cotton and padi-
lands. The Nile floods annually, which enables the
Egyptian peasants to practise a form of basin irri-
gation. Large quantities of silty water are held back
for crop irrigation. Today with multi-purpose dams,
e.g. at Aswan, more and more land is being claimed
from the desert to support the growing population.
A COMPARATIVE STUDY OF TWO AREAS WITH
CONTRASTING POPULATION DENSITIES
North-West Europe (density over 77 persons per
square kn/201, persons per square mile) and the
Amazon basin (density below 4 persons per square
km/10 persons per square mile).
1. North-West Europe has been a centre of civili-
zation for over I 500 years. It has long been settled
and developed by people of European and Cauca-
sian stock. In contrast. the Amazon basin is the
home of only a handful of primitive tribes such as
Boros who are still at a level of. Stone Age civiliza-
don, similar to that of the Pygmies of the Ziiire
basin. They have no permanent settlements and they
have been unable to develop the area in any way.
2. North-West Europe lies entirely within the tem-
perate zone which has warm summers and mild win-
ters. This climate is the most conducive to human
habitation because it is stimulating and men have the
greatest capacity for work. The region is thus pleas-
ant to live in and favourable for development.
The 'steaming' heat of the Amazon, excessively
damp and with a very high relative humidity, make
living conditions difficult. The climate is oppressive,
enervating and most trying. One gets tired very
quickly, and it is not possible to work for long hours.
Few people are ever attracted to settle here and the
Amazon remains one of the least developed parts of
the globe.
3. The natural vegetation of North-West Europe is
temperate deciduous forest on the lowlands and
evergreen coniferous forest on the highlands. The
trees have great commercial value and are exten-
sively felled for the lumbering industry or to make
way for the plough. Agriculture is highly developed,
farms are scientifically managed and the fertility of
the soil carefully maintained. Crop yields are some
of the highest in the world. Despite all these factors,
the high population density makes the import of
foodstuffs a necessity.
ln comparison, the Amazon has practically no
organized agriculture. It is a vast stretch of tropical
jungle or selvas, difficult to clear, and, once cleared,
even more difficult to maintain. Though it is the
home of natural rubber, climatic, soil and other
environmental conditions are so adverse for its
large-scale cultivation that it accounts for less than
1 per cent of the world's natural rubber production.
Lumbering is difficult because the wide variety of
trees do not occur in pure stands. The Amazonian
natives are still at a stage of hunting, fishing and
food-gathering, or raising a few starchy crops in their
small clearings. The soil is heavily leached, acidic
and deteriorates rapidly when cleared of forest. It
can support few settlements.
4. North-West Europe is the home of the industrial
Revolution. Many inventors, technicians and scien-
tists come from here. The presence of coal, iron ore
and other industrial raw materials enables a large
range of manufactured goods to be made and
exported. [t is from here that other countries have
learnt how to industrialize, Britain, France, Belgium
and the Netherlands were all great colonial powers
which once held land overseas. Industrial raw mate-
rials used to come from their colonial territories and
still come from newly independent countries. Fero-
metals, cotton, wool, rubber, sugar tohacco arrive
in North-West Europe in large quantities to be pro-
cessed by the industrial plants. Industrialization and
economic wealth enable the small countries of
North-West Europe to support a large population.
In contrast, the Amazon was once a colonial ter-
ritory. Portuguese influence is still apparent in the
cities and towns of Brazil but climatic conditions
were so unfavourable for permanent residence that
few Europeans were prepared to settle in the
Amazon. The question of industrialization does not
arise when agriculture itself cannot be firmly estab-
lished, and thus population is limited to those who
can subsist on the fruits and animals of the forest.
5. North-West Europe is bounded by a long
indented coastline giving great opportunity for sea
transport which is the most economic form of bulk
conveyance. Its network of rail, road, air and water
transport has resulted in its pre-eminence as the
'heart of world trade'. London, Paris, Amsterdam,
Rotterdam, Brussels, Copenhagen, Hamburg and
Antwerp have long been centres in international
commerce and industrv. In fact. few areas outside
north-western Europe have developed an urban
life,so highly sophisticated as in the metropolitan
capitals here. In comparison, the Amazon, despite
its central position astride the equator and between
the two Americas, has not been able to advance

beyond the food-gathering stage. The Amazon
River floods extensively. Though it is navigable for
thousands of kilometres upstream, the absence of a
productive hinterland and lack of commerical enter-
prises mean few towns and even fewer ports. lts pop-
ulation will remain sparse for many years to come.
6. North-West Europe is not as rich in mineral
resources as in the past because many minerals have
been exhausted. Its greatest assets are still coal and
some deposits of iron. They are easily developed for
industrial uses. But in the Amazon, although some
rich minerals have been located, they are so inac-
cessible that they are as yet of little economic
significance.
Some Basic Population Problems
The world is experiencing an ever increasing rise in
human numbers. The rise differes greatly from,coun-
try to country, e.g.2.8 per cent per year in Malaysia,
and 1.3 per cent in Japan. It has been found that
industrial countries and urban districts usually have
lower birth rates than agricultural nations and rural
districts. Can you attempt to explain why? Countries
29,A A slum in the overcrowded Peruvian port of Callao.
The need for housing and employment are two problems
posed by population expansion Camera Press
with a higher standard of living (Britain, Sweden,
the U.S.A., Australia) have lower rates of popula-
tion growth (i.e. families tend to be smaller) than
countries where the standard of living is lower (e.g.
India, China, Indonesia, Zaire).It is most disheart-
ening to note that the countries of Monsoon Asia
which can ill-afford any further increases in popu-
lation, register some of the greatest population
increases. The growth of population creates an
urgent need for the basic requirements of civilized
human existence: food, clothing, housing, educa-
tion, social, medical and cultural amenities.
According to a recent United Nations survey, four
out of five people in the world are probably
underfed. Many of the Asian countries suffer acute
shortages of food and many people perish in famines
every year. The problem of food shortages is great-
est in China, India, Pakistan, Bangladesh and Indo-
nesia, where there are far more mouths to be fed
than there are crops to be harvested. For clothing,
Asia's needs are not too great, thanks to its tropical
climate. Even so, there are millions in Asia and
Africa going about clad only in rags.
The housing problem is often acute, especially in

29.8 Boat dwellers in Aberdeen, Hong Kong Servizio
Editoria le Fotografico
fast growing towns and cities. Many families are
crammed into small houses, badly ventilated and
unhealthy. Many are pavement dwellers and some
spend their whole lives on boats (Plates 29.A and
B). Slums are almost inevitable in every major city.
Illiteracy is still high in many parts of the world.
There are literally millions who cannot read or write.
Adequate funds must be found to construct schools,
train teachers and provide textbooks to educate the
masses. Every effort must be made to eradicate pov-
erty and raise world's standard of living. Both sef-
help and mutual-help are necessary to improve the
living conditions of the masses of the underdevel-
oped countries. The problem of overpopulation is
not a domestic issue, it is the concern of the world.
Let the 'haves' help the less fortunate 'have-nots',
and let the more prosperous nations render effective
assistance to the weaker and poorer nations. If this
attitude of mutual help can be made to work on a
global scale, Man will have gone a long way in
making the world a better place to live in.
Some Ways of Relieving World
Population Problems
There are probably three main ways of meeting
world population problems.
1. Cut down the rate of population increase. This is
done through family planning or birth control, which
is now widely practised throughout the world. If the
number of births can be cut down, the rate of
increase of population will be slowed down and
although population will continue to grow, increases
in food production may be able to keep pace with
the demand. Japan is a fine example of a country
where this has happened. Her annual birth rate has
been cut down from 22 per thousand in 1947 to only
L3 per thousand today. She has succeeded in almost
halving her birth ratu within the two decades and has
experienced an appreciable rise in the standard of
living.
2. Increase food yields. World production of food-
stuffs and raw mateials can be increased either by
opening up new lands for agriculture or by raising
the crop yields of the existing farm lands. New tech-
niques can be developed to obtain higher yields per
hectare through such processes as plant breeding and
experimentation, increased application of fertilizers,
farm mechanization, elimination of weeds and in-
sect pests and more intensive use of land.
Many lands that were once considered wastes can
be made productive by drainage or irrigation
schemes. Drought-resistant crop varieties can be
grown in semi-arid regions. Similarly, cold-resistant
species have proved tolerant of temperate continen-
tal conditions. Over large areas of the mid-latitude
29.C The world's growing population must be kept healthy.
Indonesian school children receive innoculations. United
Nations

grasslands, selected pasture grasses and fodder crops
have been sown to make them more nutritious for
animal-grazlng. Reafforestation helps to conserve
one of the richest natural resources-timber.
3. Migration. This may not reduce the total popu-
lation of the world, but it does help to relieve the
socio-economic problems caused by overcrowding in
certain parts of the globe. The world is so unevenly
peopled that underpopulation, as in Australia, New
Zealand, Canada and some parts of the U.S.S.R.,
can be looked upon as a national weakness that
retards full economic development. Floods of emi-
grants have left Europe to seek their fortune in the
New World. The U.S.A. is, in reality, a nation made
up of the various European stocks that have
streamed across the Atlantic since the beginning of
the sixteenth centurv. Canada with less than two
persons to the square kilometre (five persons to the
square mile), should welcome immigrants to develop
her vast potential national resources.
It is estimated that lands south of the Tropic of
Capricorn contain less than five per cent of the
world's population. These empty southern conti-
nents thus form the target for the present wave of
intercontinental migrations. The European and
Asiatic immigrants to South Africa, Brazil and Aus-
tralasia have not only played a useful role in devel-
oping the 'south', but also by their departure have
helped to relieve the population pressure of their
mother lands.
The Chinese and Indians from their crowded
homelands in mainland China and India have con-
tributed most significantly in the economic devel-
opment of many parts of South-East Asia.
Ouestions and Exercises
1. Locate on a world map:
(a) A very densely populated area.
(b) A very sparsely populated area.
Account for the various factors that contribute
to lheir great contrast in density.
2. What is meant by the following:
(a) overpopulation;
(b) mortality rate;
(c) inter-continental migration;
(d) annual population growth.
Give examples from your population studies of
the context in which the above terms may be
used. (Quote any available statistics to support
your explanation).
3. Climate, vegetation, relief, accessibility and
minerals are some of the major geographical
factors that determine the pattern and density
of population distribution. Choose one actual
area in the world where each of the above fac-
Sample Objective Ouestions
l. Java, Hong Kong and Manhattan 
2.
share one of the followins features.
Pick out lhe correct one.
A commercial activities.
B high population density
C rapid industrial growth
D multi-racial communities
tors plays a vital role in population distribution
and explain its effects.
Explain any three of the following statements;
(a) Rural districts often record a higher birth
rate than urban districts.
(b) Industrial countries normally maintain a
higher standard of living.
(c) At the present rate of world population
increase the pessimistic outlook of Malthus
will be justified.
(d) Migration alone will not solve the popula-
tion problems of the world.
Either: Explain how Japan was able to almost
halve her birth rate within two decades (from
2.2 per cent in 1947 to 1.3 per cent in I97l).
re71,).
Or: Say why north-western Europe is one of the
most densely populated parts of the world.
4.
5,
Thomas R. Malthus (1776-1834)
predicted that the world would suf-
fer from a population explosion
when food production falls to keep
up with the alarming rate of popula-
tion increase. Yet today we are
much better off than our forefathers.
This is because of the following de-
velopments which Malthus did not
foresee except
A the advances made in the fields of
science and technology
B the mechanization of agriculture
C the practice of family planning

D the shorter life expectancy of
modern man
3. The continent which has one-
quarter of the world's land surface
but accounts for only one-tenth of
the total population is
A Europe
B North America
C Africa
D Australasia
4. The temperate grasslands of the
world may be described as
A very densely populated
B densely populated
C moderately populated
D very, very sparsely populated
5. Factors which discourage the con-
centration of population and settle-
ments are
I cold
II heat
III aridity
IV altitude
V remoteness
Which of the above factors are ap-
plicable to the sparse population of
Patagonia, South America?
A I, II, and III
B I, III and V
C II, III and IV
D II, IV and V
6. Which of the following countries has
ihe lowest rate of annual population
growth?
A Japan
B Malaysia
C India
D Brazil
7. Industrial areas normally register a
lower birth rate than agricultural
areas because
A industrial workers are most con-
scious of family planning
B pollution in industrial areas re-
duces the fertility of women
C there are fewer women in indust-
rial areas
D married couples are usually sepa-
rated in industrial areas
8. Problems of overpopulation include
the following except
A widespread unemployment
B a rapid increase in population
C a decline in the standard of
health
D inadequate work force
9. Of the following densely populated
islands which has the highest density
per sq.km/mile?
A Java
B Luzon
C Hong Kong
D Singapore
10. From the list of geographical areas
given below, the most densely popu-
lated is
A the Mid-west of U.S.A.
B northern Europe
C East Africa
D the Indian sub-continent
I l Countries with a high population
density and a high rate of annual
population increase are those which
A have low crop yields
B receive large numbers of immig-
rants
C export mainly manufactured
goods
D have a high standard of living
12. There are not many Japanese who
emigrate. The majority of those who
have gone overseas are to be found
in
A thc U.S.A.
B Brazil
C Australia
D Vietnam
13. Of the following areas which is
LEAST likely to attract many peo-
ple?
A the Laurentian Shield
B Mediterranean Shoreland
C Visayan Islands
D Coastal Brazil
14. Countries like the U.S.A., Canada
and Australia are said to have be-
nefited from 'brain gain' because
they
A sponsor their students in overseas
universities
B regularly host conferences at the
United Nations
C accept many immigrants who are
professionally qualified
D offer scholarships to their own
students in local universities
15. Life expectancy refers to the
A average age at which people die
B span of life during which women
can bear children
C maximum number of children
that a couple may have
D age when men get their pension
16. The most densely populated part of
the Brazil is
A the Brazilian Plateau
B the Amazon Basin
C interior Bazil
D coastal Brazil
17. The most densely populated indust-
rial district of Japan is
A the Hanshim Industrial Districr
B the Keihin Industrial District
C the Kitakyushu Industrial District
D the Nagoya Industrial District
18. Which of the following statements is
incorrect?
A Women live longer than men
B Large parts of Canada are very
sparsely populated
C The population of Switzerland is
very evenly distributed
D In most countries, the capital city
has the largest urban population
19. The cool temperate continental in-
teriors are sparsely populated be-
cause
A they have an interior location
B there are few materials
C the sub-soil is permanently frozen
D natural vegetation is very lacking
20. Central Australia is almost uninha-
bited because it
A is densely forested
B has few minerals
C is a desert
D is too far from the urban districts

