Chapter 28 Manufacturing Industry and
The lron and Steel Industry
The Rise of Manufacturing Industry
Man's universal demand for food, clothing, shelter
and other comforts of life has prompted the creation
of many new things. Foods are preserved or canned
to last longer. Modern homes have telephones, tel-
evision sets, refrigerators, washing machines and
other luxuries. Few people ever realize that all these
changes have come about only within the last 200
years, beginning with the Industrial -Revolution of
the eighteenth century. Two great developments,
the burning of coal for steam power and the smelting
of iron to make steel, have ushered in a new phase
in human history, the age of science and technology.
A host of raw materials such as cotton, timber, rub-
ber, copper, bauxite and limestone can be converted
into manufactured goods of great utility like shirts,
paper, tyres, copper wire, aluminium and cement.
The work of domestic craftsmen has been taken over
Fig. 28.1 The major industrial regions of the world
by highly complicated machines. Village workshops
were forced out of business and in their place were
established factories. The manufacturing industries
penetrate deeply into the life of everybody.
The industrial growth was greatest in Western
Europe and North America. It is spreading fast into
other continents and to the less developed countries.
The increase in the population of industrial workers
and the greater productivity of each worker have
increased the annual output of manufactured prod-
ucts many times. Through greater automation and
standardized mass-production, industrial expansion
seems likely to go on and on. Fig. 28.1 shows the
chief manufacturing regions of the world.
Groups of Industries
The range and complexity of modern manufacturing
industries are so great that it is by no means easy to
231's
-----r.i-----
t
I-T-
I
I
Principal manufacturing areas
Lesser manufacturing regions

28.A A clothing factory in Singapore. Many layers of cloth
are cut out simultaneously to speed production. Ministry of
Culture, Singapore
classify them but most of them fall into the following
eight groups.
l. Iron and steel industry. The iron and steel indus-
try forms the basis of all the ferrous metallurgical in-
dustries. It is the mast important of all industries
known. Without the steel bars, blooms, billets, slabs
and wires supplied by the iron and steel mills, other
industries cannot survive. The existence and pros-
perity of the automobile industry, metallurgical
industry, shipbuilding and aircraft industry and the
mineral extracting industry is directly linked to that
of the iron and steel industry.
2. Fuel and power industry. This branch of industry
deals entirely with the generation, extraction or
refining of the various sources of power: steam
power (mainly from coal), hydro-electricity (from
falling water), thermal electricity (from burning
other fuels), petrol and oil (from the refining of
petroleum). In addition to these are natural gas and
nuclear power.
3. Mineral extracting industry. This includes the
concentration, smelting and alloying of minerals and
the smelting of non-ferrous metals, e.g. copper, tin,
aluminium, lead, zinc and their alloyed metals such
as brass and bronze; also that of ferrous metals, e.g.
iron, manganese, chromium, nickel, tungsten,
cobalt, vanadium, molybdenum and others.
4. Metallurgical industry. This section refers to
machinery, instruments, equipment and tools that
are manufactured from metals. It includes iron and
steelworks, mechanical engineering, electrical engi-
neering, shipbuilding, locomotives, automobiles,
aircraft and cutlery.
5. Chemicals industry. This is the production and
development of a chain of scientifically devised
materials of a highly specialized nature and is
encroaching into almost every branch of industry.
Some of the most important products of this branch
of industry include: acids, alkalis, gases, dye-stuffs,
soap, paints, varnishes, solvents, detergents, fertil-
izers, insecticides, pharmaceuticals (drugs and medi-
cines), glass, plastics, paper and pulp, synthetic fibres
and synthetic oils.
6. Textiles. This is one of the oldest and the most
widespread industries. It is the spinning and weaving
of textile materials from cotton, wool, flax (linen),
silk, jute, hemp and hairs. The existing textile
centres have also developed artificial fibres from syn-
thetic or nitrogenous materials, e.g. rayon, nylon,
dacron, teteron, terylene, perlon (Plate 28.A).
7. Food processing industry. This is the preparation
of foodstuffs for human consumption from both
animal and vegetative sources and includes flour
milling, oil milling, sugar refining, meat packing,
brewing, confectionery as well as the canning, bot-
tling, preservation and preparation of a whole
range of foodstuffs like fish, fruits, vetetables, bev-
erages, spices, breakfast cereals and other products.
8. Rest of the consumer goods industries. This
branch loosely covers all the rest of the manufac-

. lehnologY
. Irbour torca
I politicsl stability
. sta
. climate
. hittorical etc.
ara
. land
a lta
Fig.2a.2 Factors of industrial location
tured goods consumed or used by Man. They include
miscellaneous industries such as footwear, furniture,
pottery and porcelain, printing, cement, toys, cos-
metics, jewellery and other luxury goods.
Factors of Industrial Location
Many factors may play a role in deciding where
industries should be located and it is never easy to
pin-point them all. An industrialist who sets out to
locate a site for his factory will have to assess, to the
best of his ability, the various forces that may influ-
ence his investment. Basically, the production fac-
tors, raw materials, power and human resources,
merit his greatest attention. A good network of
transport enables all the production factors to be
assembled at his factory site at the lowest possible
cost. But unless there is a demand for his goods, all
the other advantages will serve no purpose. The
location of the site in relation to the entire trading
zone and, above all, the period of time when the
enterprise was undertaken also affect industrial
location. No single factor decides the location
and the growth of an industry. The factors are com-
plementary, reacting upon one another in a complex
fashion. Very often the advantage of one factor is
offset by the disadvantage of another. For instance
an abundant, cheap labour force may be offset by
low output and inefficiency, or by high transport
costs, or by high unavailability of certain vital raw
materials. It is never easy to secure an ideal site. The
entrepreneur simply has to make the best use of
whatever factors are at his disposal.
The following are the various factors that are nor-
mally considered in the location of an industry
(Fig. 28.2).
1. Raw materials. Raw materials are the basic
requirements of any manufacturing industry. No fac-
tory can turn out goods unless it has some raw
materials to begin with. They may be in the form of
metals, ores, rocks, cereals, fibres, beverages or any
other economic product. Before the development of
an adequate system of roads, rhilways, waterways,
sea and air routes, industries were very localized,
depending to a great extent on the availability of
local raw materials. The pencil-making industry of
Keswick in the Lake District owed its existence to
the availability of local graphite and timber. On a
larger scale, the cotton textile industry of Bombay
was based, and is still dependent, on the supply of
raw cotton from the Deccan cotton fields. The tim-
ber and paper industry of Canada relies entirely on
its temperate forests. This avoids the unnecessary
transport of waste materials, e.g. sawn timber makes
up less than 40 per cent of wood in a log, the rest
being mainly waste.
Modern industries require a wide variety of raw

materials and not all of them are available on the
spot, imports are necessary. For example, the iron
and steel industry requires iron ore, coke and flux
and ferro-alloys such as manganese, nickel and chro-
mium. The Ruhr district of West Germany has abun-
dant coal and limestone (used for flux) but nowadays
has little iron. It imports the iron from Sweden, and
the other ferro-alloys from all over the world. It is
not true to say that without local raw materials,
industries will not prosper. Britain has no cotton and
yet she has been a leading exporter of cotton textiles
since the nineteenth century.
2. Power or fuel. If you look at the world's indus-
trial areas, shown in Fig. 28.1, you will realize that
the greatest concentration is around the major coal-
fields. This can be easily explained. As industries
began with the Industrial Revolution, when coal was
the only available fuel to generate steam power to
run the machinery, industrial sites had to be located
at or near the coalfields. Furthermore. the fuel effi-
ciency was extremely low at that time requiring
something like twelve tonnes of coal to smelt one
tonne of iron ore. The pull of a coalfield as an indus-
trial location factor was indisputable! In fact, almost
all the major industrial areas of the world are based
on coalfields, e.g. the Ruhr, Pittsburgh, Midlands,
Donbas, Kuzbas, Jamshedpur, Sydney and many
others.
With the improvement made in fuel efficiency
today, requiring only one tonne of coal to smelt one
tonne of iron ore, it matters very little whether iron
is brought to coalfields or coal to iron fields but
industry remains in the coalfield areas where it was
first established.
Its great bulk, its higher transport cost and its
lower energy output, have all contributed to the
declining importance of coal as a fuel. But its use is
still of economic significance. Coal is still burnt to
power steam turbines, to generate thermal electric-
ity or as a source of coke for smelting. Useful by-
products from the coke ovens, e.g. gas, benzole,
coal-tar for dyestuffs, ammonium sulphate for fer-
tilizers and for manufacturing nylon are also impor-
tant.
The most economical form of power is electricity
both thermal and hydro. It is clean, efficient, and
can be easily transmitted. Modern industrial plants
are run by electricity, but because it is easily trans-
mitted from place to place it is rarely a significant
control over industrial location. In some cases, how-
ever, it is important. For instance, the siting of
aluminium smelting plants relies to a large extent on
the supply of cheap and abundant hydro-electric
power as at Odda in Norway and Kitimat in British
Columbia.
Though petroleum is extensively used in industries
as a form of power, it is seldom a factor of location.
The Middle East, Venezuela and many other petro-
leum drilling areas have few manufacturing indus-
tries. There are, however, industries at the exporting
ports or importing ports where the products of oil
refining give rise to petrochemicals and allied indus-
tries.
Other sources of power such as natural gas, solar
and nuclear power are used only in the very
advanced nations. When their extraction and control
is perfected on a commercial scale, they may be a
decisive factor in the location of future industrial
areas.
3. Transport. The function of transport is to move
raw materials to industrial sites and to convey the
finished products to the consuming districts. Bulky
goods like coal, iron, timber, grains and heavy
machinery are most economically conveyed by
waterways. Rivers and canals have long been
regarded as a vital link between the 'maker' and
'user' of consumer goods. The Rhine and its asso-
ciated canal system serve the industrial districts of
three European nations-Switzerland, West Ger-
many and the Netherlands. In North America, the
St. Lawrence-Great Lakes waterway links the Atlan-
tic with the interior. The two-way transport of coal
and iron ore between the Pittsburgh district and the
Lake Superior region enables the most advanta-
geous load-coefficient to be attained. If you look at
a world map you will see that many of the major
industrial regions have a coastal location, which
facilitates the import and export of bulky goods by
sea, e.g. Merseyside (Liverpool), Clydeside (Glas-
gow), Hamburg, Genoa, New York, San Francisco,
Tokyo-Yokohama, Sydney and many others. Where
expensive overland routes by road or rail add appre-
ciably to the cost of production as in the case of
Switzerland, people tend to specialize in high grade
articles that are less bulky but fetch a higher price.
The greater mobility of inland motor transport has
resulted in the decentralization of many industries.
Lack of an adequate network of communications has
prevented large areas of the tropics from being
developed.
4. Markets. Economic production is based entirely
on demand. Unless there is a promise of reward in
monetary terms, industrialists will hesitate to invest,
no matter how eood is the location. Industrial

regions are therefore established near consuming
areas, where there is a heavy concentration of peo-
ple, even when raw materials and other factors are
unfavourable. The densely populated regions of
Western Europe and North America are thus impor-
tant industrial areas as well. Their high per capita
income creates great demand for consumer goods of
any kind. But dense population alone, without the
necessary purchasing power need not constitute a
market at all. Countries like China, Indo-Pakistan
and Indonesia, which are densely peopled, do not
have a proportionate amount of industrial develop-
ment.
5. Human resources. This comprises the inventor,
the manager and the worker. A successful industrial
undertaking makes use of the various machines
devised by scientists, technologists and inventors.
Researches are carried out all the time to improve
the productivity and elficiency of existing means
of production. Human ingenuity and inventive re-
sourcefulness have made it possible for highly com-
plex plants to be machine-operated in almost any
geographical environment. Withoui the techno-
logical skill of such people, industrial development
could not have taken place.
Factories are run by people and the numbers
ngededare determinedbythesizeofthe factory.Three
u$""t. of labour have to be considered, its availa-
bility, capability and reward. In the past when
machines were smaller and less complicated, a large
number of factory hands were needed to operate
them. Many stages in processing. e.g. sorting or
28.8 A car assembly line in Britain Standard Triumph
packing, were done by hand. This required a large,
cheap but relatively unskilled labour force. But con-
ditions today are quite different. Large, sophisti-
cated machines can be managed by only a few,
skilled workers. More and more production stages
are being mechanized. But this has not resulted in
any decline of production. It has, on the contrary,
increased the annual output. It is useful to remem-
ber that a cheap and abundant labour force is not
always a locational advantage, unless the labour is
also efficient. In the light industries, where a little
factory knowledge is preferred, semi-skilled labour-
ers are employed. Women are normally engaged in
jobs that are repetitive in nature. In the field of
highly specialized industries such as diamond-cutting
and the making of precision instruments, the skill
and experience of workers are the most important
factors. The Swiss are craftsmen whose inherited
skill and aptitude for watch-making and other fields
of engineering are outstanding. Such specialized
industries are often very localized.
The availability of labour and technology is of lit-
tle significance unless they can be put to good use.
The entrepreneur's role is to coordinate such factors
with various others that he encounters in his day-to-
day administration. With foresight and careful plan-
ning, he will be able to forge ahead and achieve his
goals. But in many instances, bad management will
wreck an entire organization even with the best of
the locational factors.
6. Capital. For the inception and continuance of an
industry, capital is indispensable. Whether it be a

private or a joint-stock company, unless the enter-
prise is financially sound, there will be no prospects
for the firm. Fortunately capital is a very mobile
factor. Where the industrial potential is good, even
in adverse geographical areas, financiers will invest.
In the desert of Chile are copper smelting and ni-
trate extracting industries. Tin is mined in the
Andean highlands at a height of over 3 660 metres
(12,000 feet). Water and provisions are brought in
daily from Perth to the gold mines at Kalgoorlie
and Murchison in the Australian Desert more than
560 km (350 miles) away. All these are evidences of
the great mobility of capital. It is not an exaggera-
tion to state that the majority of the tropical planta-
tions, mines and large firms are in the hands of
foreigners, because these are the people who have
capital.
7. Other factors. A close examination of some the
world's minor industrial areas will reveal that several
other local factors have influenced industrial loca-
tion. These complex factors may be physical, social,
political, or historical. A natural site such as a shel-
tered coast ora strategic junction, may be the key
factor to a certain factory siting. A stimulating cli-
mate like that of the temperate zone is much more
comfortable to work in than that of the tropics. The
on-shore Westerlies were partly responsible for the
rise of the Lancashire cotton textiles industry
because a humid atmosphere is conducive for cotton
spinning. The invention of artificial humidifiers has
since offset the advantage. A stable government pro-
vides the right climate for foreign investment. Sin-
gapore is striving to do this. Disturbances caused by
Red Guards in Hong Kong and political conflict in
mainland China caused many international investors
to divert their capital from Hong Kong for a time
though this setback has now been overcome. Bang-
ladesh will feel the effects of its civil war for much
longer. The confidence of overseas investors will
have to be restored.
In many countries, the government has found it
necessary to intervene in the location of industries,
for political, economic or military reasons. In the
U.S.S.R., a dispersed pattern of industrial location
was established, in the belief that 'putting all the
eggs in one basket' is far too risky. Her development
of the Trans-Ural and Kuznets (Kuzbas) industrial
districts was aimed at further decentralization of her
industries. Efforts made in industrial development
by the T.V.A. (Tennessee Valley Authority) in the
United States are part of the scheme to rehabilitate
this 'most depressed area' of America. Similar
attempts are being made in the United Kingdom to
encourage industrial undertakings in the depressed
'Development Areast, such as the north-west. As an
inducement to potential investors, very favourable
terms are being offered, such as lower local rates,
low-cost lands, interest-free loans, government
assistance and other preferential treatment.
Whatever advantages and industrial site may
enjoy, there is no guarantee that the advantage will
be permanent. New highways may divert much of
the traffic; a previous unorganized labour force may
suddenly be unionized as in Japan; local rates may
be increased; revised factory legislation may double
the cost of production; elections may return a new
government, and so forth. The world is changing so
quickly that an advantage at one time may not be so
by the turn of the century. There is always risk in
business and one must be very subjective when
analysing the factors that affect industrial location
at any one time. And yet we have seen that although
coal is no longer as important a location factor as it
was, coalfields are still the main industrial areas.
This is partly because a supply of skilled labour has
been built up, thus offsetting some other disadvan-
tages, and partly because of the huge expense
involved in setting up new lines of communications,
workshops, and homes for factory workers in new
sites with locational advantages. When industries
stay in traditional sites in this way, it is called indus-
trial inertia.
The lron and Steel Industry
NATURE, PROPERTIES AND USES
Iron is the commonest, cheapest, and most versatile
of all metals. It is, in fact, the basrs of the modern
industrial complex. About 90 per cent of the world's
iron ore is used in the making of steel. A host of
secondary industries are based on iron and steel,
including mechanical, constructional and electrical
engineering, shipbuilding, the making of rails, auto-
mobiles, aircraft, bridges, machines and other
equipment. Its magnetic properties make it indis-
pensable in electrical engineering where it consti
tutes an-essential part of the dynamo, the motor,
telephone, telegraph, radio and other electrical
appliances. It has a high ductility and can be drawn
into bars or wires of varying sizes without snapping.
Besides its great strength and toughness it is also
elastic and can withstand great stresses without any
appreciable distortion. When alloyed with other

28.C Open-cast iron ore mining in Minnesota Servizio Edi-
toriale Fotografico
metals such as nickel and chromium, it has increased
resistance to heat, shock and abrasion. These are
useful properties in making tools, machine parts,
springs and stainless steel.
Types of lron Ore
Generally speaking, the world's principal sources of
iron ores belong to one of the following kinds.
1. Magnetite. It has the richest metallic iron content
(70 per cent) with high magnetic qualities, excellent
for the electrical industry. It is mainly from igneouS
rocks and is black in colour. The Swedish iron fields
at Kiruna have some of the world's best magnetite
iron ores.
2. Haematite. Another high grade iron ore with a
metallic content of 50 to 65 per cent. It is mainly
from sedimentary sources and is reddish in appear-
ance. Most of the iron from the Lake Superior
region is haematite.
3. Limonite. The commonest of the commercially
workable iron ores. Its metallic content is less than
50 per cent and it is heavily charged with impurities.
It is brown in colour and is formed by the decom-
position of other iron-bearing minerals. It is some-
times called 'bog, iron ore' as it occurs in lakes and
swamps.
4. Siderite. One of the low grade iron ores with a
metallic content of between 20 and 30 per cent. It
is a residual ore deposited as a sediment when other
rock materials have been eroded and carried away.
There are important deposits of siderite ore in the
Cleveland Hills and around Scunthorpe in England
and in Lorraine, France where the ore contains a
high proportion of phosphorus.
The properties of lron and Steel
Iron and steel, which form the basis of ferrous metal-
lurgical industries, are of the greatest importance in
modern industry because they are capable ofvery exten-
sive application. Their important properties are summa-
rized below:
l. Great strength and toughness. Iron and steel being
so strong and tough are indispensable in modern con-
structional and mechanical engineering industries.
2. Great elasticity. Steel can withstand great stress and
strain without appreciable distortion and is excellent for
making machines and transporting vehicles.
3. High ductility. Steel can be drawn into bars, tubes,
wires or plates without snapping. It is thus very useful
for making machine parts and tools.
4. Cheap metal. It is because iron is so common that
steel is so cheap. Its price is only fi that of tin.
5. Ease of production. Iron-ore when processed with
coke and limestone in blast furnaces can easily be made
into steel of many different quatties.
6. Alloyability. Iron when alloyed with other ferro-
metals gives rise to a wide range of steel which is suitable
for a variety of industrial purposes. It can be alloyed
with each of the following minerals with the following
results.
(a) With manganese, iron becomes tougher and is
very good for the manufacture of steam rollers.
(b) With vanadium, iron becomes highly resilient and
is excellent for making springs.
(c) With chromium, iron is able to retard rusting, as
in stainless steel, which is used for the manufacture of
cutlery.
(d) Mth cobalt, the magnetic qualities of iron are
improved. This is useful for making high-speed cut-
ting tools.
(e) With nickel, iron becomes tougher and more
ductile. The alloy is used for making armour plating.
(f) With tungsten, the melting-point of iron is raised.
This is useful for the manufacture of cutting tools.
(g) With copper, the resistance of iron to corrosion is
increased. This is useful for the manufacture of rail-
way sleepers and steel sheets.
(h) With molybdenum, the high temperature strength
of iron is raised. This is excellent for the manufacture
of rifle barrels and propeller shafts.
The making of different types
of lron and Steel
l. The essential ingredients for the manufacture of
iron and steel are: iron-ore, coke and limestone. They
are smelted in a blast furnace at a temperature of over

I 650"C (3,000"F.). The sxygen in the ore and the
carbon in the coke ombine to form a gas (oxide of
carbon) while the impurities in the ore combine with the
limestone to form slag. The molten iron is then drawn
off from the furnace base and led into moulds to solidify
as pig iron which has a carbon content of 34Vo.
2. From the pig iron the following iron products are
obtained as a result of further processing.
(a) Cast iron is made by reheating the pig iron with
steel scrap and then pouring the heated material into
sand or metal moulds. It contains impurities and is
brittle, e.g. cast iron lamp post whicli snaps under
pressure.
(b) Wrought iron is made by re-smelting pig iron and
removing the impurities and carbon by the puddling
process. It is strong and tough and resists rust. It is
expensive too and is used for making ornamental
gates and fences.
(c) Steel is made by reheating pig iron in converters
to remove the impurities and adding in controlled
amounts of carbon (0.3 to 2.2%) and ferro-alloys,
e.g. manganese, vanadium, chromium, cobalt, nickel,
tungpten, molybdenum, etc.
Methods of Steel making
There are several methods of making steel. These are
as follows:
l. The Bessemer acid process. The Bessemer process
was first invented by an Englishman named Henry Bes-
semer in 1856. The converter with acid-lining bricks and
with a perforated base as shown in Figure 28.4 is filled
with molten pig iron, into which air is blown to remove
the impurities. Controlled amounts of carbon and alloy-
ing metals are then added at the mouth of the converter.
Within 20-30 minutes the process is completed, the
converter is tilted and the molten steel is porjred into
ingots or used to make slabs and billets.
2. The basic Bessemer process (Gilchrist-Thomas
Method). The original Bessemer process does not re-
move the phosphorus impurities from pig iron. In 1878
the Gilchrist-Thomas process was invented. In this pro-
cess tlere is a basic lining of bricks in the converter,
capable of effectively removing the phosphorus and
sulphur impurities in pig iron. This method enables large
quantities of phosphorus-rich iron-ore to be smelted.
3. The open-hearth prooess (Martin-Siemens Method).
In this method, pig iron lies in a shallow, saucer-shaped
pool as shown in Figure 28.5 and is heated from above
by a powerful flame of pre-heated air at a temperature of
I 650'C (3,000'F.). The bumt gases escape to the regen-
erators to be found on both sides of the furnace. The
process is slow and.takes about 12 hours to complete.
o
N!
(oo
smoke and flames due
' to burning up
' of impurities
Fig.28.4 The Bessemer Converter
impurities
molten
pig iron
Fig. 28.3 A typical blast furnace
28s

Fig.28.5 The open-hearth furnace
But it enables high quality steel to be produced and
it also makes use of scrap iron. Most British stainless
steel is made by this process.
4. The electric furnace. This is the most effective
but also the most expensive way of making very high
quality steel. This is an electrolytic process con-
trolled by the graphite-made electrodes. The current
passes through the molten iron with no contamina-
tion whatsoever. About 15% of Britain's steel is
made in electric furnaces.
5. The oxygen process. In highly advanced coun-
tries the oxygen process is employed to make high
quality steel. A high pressure jet of oxygen (instead
of just air) is blown through the molten iron in the
converter as in the Bessemer process to make excel-
lent steel. The process takes only an hour. It is a
Fig. 28.6 World distribution
of steel production
quick and cheap way of making steel. Seventy-five
per cent of Japan's steel is made by the oxygen
process.
Factors affecting the location
of the lron and Steel industrY
Figure 28.6 shows the world's major steel-making
areas. The most important areas are located in West-
ern Europe and north-east U.S.A. and Japan. There
are many factors which influence their location in
these areas. The chief factors are set out below.
1. Raw materials. The availability of pig iron scrap
which is most abundant in heavily populated indust-
rial areas, e.g. Britain and Japan.
2. Fuel. Coal used to be the major fuel pull for
British iron and steel areas and this was also true of
most European countries. The availability of cheap
hydro-electric power in Sweden, Switzerland, Japan
and the U.S.S.R. (the Dnieper River Scheme) has
influenced the siting of iron and steel mills in these
areas.
3. Water. As 293 cu. m (65,000 gallons) are re-
quired to produce 1 ton of steel, a wet-point location
is a great advantage for steel sites, e.g. Chicago,
Gary, Cleveland, Buffalo and Hamilton on the St.
Lawrence-Great Lakes region are some of the
greatest steel cities of the world.
4. Transport. As the raw materials for steel mak-
. major steel-producing districts

ing as well as the finished steel itself are all very bul-
ky, cheap transport is vital in deciding the location.
The Labrador ores of Canada come through the St.
Lawrence-Great Lakes Waterway to the steel mills
of the Lakeside industrial region. Similarly, the
Rhine transports most of the ore and steel output of
the Ruhr industrial region. Most of the steel mills
of Japan and Australia have coastal locations,
e.g. Yokohama, Kobe, Nagoya, Yawata (Japan);
Sydney, Port Kembla, Whyalla and Newcastle
(Australia).
5. Market. The steel mills are usually found in
large industrial districts which have other related in-
dustries, e.g. machinery, automobiles, locomotives
and electrical engineering to absorb the finished
steel and their by-products. The large population
also forms the market for consuming the various
products made by the mills and factories.
6. Capital. A large capital is required to initiate
and maintain the iron and steel mills. The acquisi-
tion of a site which might cover 10 sq. km (4 sq.
miles) for an integrated mill (i.e. those that combine
the smelting of ores in blast furnaces, the making of
steel and some finished products like steel sheets,
pipes and girders) may run to millions of dollars.
Some of the world's largest corporations are iron
and steel corporations, e.g. the giant United States
Steel Corporation in Pittsburgh and the Tata Iron
and Steei Company (TISCO) in Jamshedpur. In the
U.S.S.R. and China, the iron and steel plants are
state-owned and they are dispersed for strategic
reasons.
7. Human resources. Large iron and steel corpora-
tions are managed by entrepreneurs possessing great
experience and skill. The mills are supervised by
qualified engineers and worked by skilled operators.
This is clearly evident in the industrialized countries
where the iron and steel industry is best developed.
The developing nations lag behind in this branch of
industry because of the lack of industrial personnel
and technical know-how. The few that have some
steel output have had their machines installed and
manned by foreigners or the plants are the result of
joint ventures involving local and foreign capital and
personnel.
The changing locations of the
World's lron and Steel industrY
The changing technology in the smelting, refining
and working of iron-ore and economic and political
considerations have been the main factors determin-
ing changes in the sites of the iron and steel industry.
The progressive changes in the location of the sites
over time and the reasons for the changes are set out
below.
1. Near forests and hills. In the early fifteenth cen-
tury when Man first knew how to make iron from ore
deposits, the basic requirements were wood, wind
and water. Scattered iron-making yards were near
forest edges where wood and charcoal were readily
available. Hillside positions were an advantage as
the downslope wind provided the 'blast' in the bel-
lows to smelt the ore. Rainfall, lakes and rivers pro-
vided the water.
2. Movement to the coalfields. In the eighteenth
century when coal and coke were increasingly used
to smelt iron, the movement was towards the
coalfield. The development of the blast furnace ex-
panded the iron and steel industry tremendously.
Since 8 tons of coal were needed to smelt 1 ton of
iron in those days, it was naturally cheaper and more
convenient to transport the ore to the coalfields. The
world's largest iron and steel sites in this period were
located at or near coalfields, e.g. in Britain the Ruhr
region, Belgium, Pittsburgh (the U.S.A.), Donbas
and Kuzbas (U.S.S.R.), etc.
3. Movement to ore-fields. By the late nineteenth
century when smelting techniques had greatly im-
proved (when only 1 ton of coal was required to
smelt 1 ton of iron-ore) the pull by coalfields no lon-
ger existed. Many steel mills sprang up in ore-fields,
e.g. in Luxembourg, Lorraine, France, Cleveland
Hills and Scunthorpe, north-east England, the Urals
of the U.S.S.R. and Belo Horizonte, Brazil.
4. Coastal locations. By the twentieth century
many of the traditional ore-fields had become ex-
hausted and remote ore-fields, e.g. Labrador, Cana-
da, had to be mined to supply the ore. The cost of
transportation, especially of bulky ores and finished
steel, became vital considerations. A coastal loca-
tion, i.e. along sea-coasts, rivers and lakes is an
advantage, and many of the newest iron and steel
mills are located near the coast, e.g. Fairless and
Sparrows Point, U.S.A.; Cleveland, Detroit and
Chicago on the shores of the St. Lawrence-Great
Lakes; Margam and Newport of coastal south
Wales.
5. Political and strategic considerations. Some gov-
ernments prefer a dispersed pattern of location for
their major industries. In the U.S.S.R. in order to
avoid over-concentration of industries in Moscow
and the Black Sea shoreland, and to develop the in-
terior of Siberia, iron and steel works were iet up in

6 4
{l
E
v
CLEVEL
ORE
NEV
i . *e$["^"i':
BIL
U
. major ironore areas
t'r
OERRO
MARCONA
.', uRlLs KU.ZNETSKY
i:'.i'
ROG MAGNITOGORSK 
.
Fig.28.7 World distribution of iron ore
the Urals using the ores of Sverdlovsk and Magnito-
gorsk. Coal is brought 2250km (1,350 miles) from
the Kuzbas Coalfield in Central Siberia. In return.
ore is transported to Kuzbas for the manufacture of
steel. In Brazll, steel mills were set up at Belo Hori-
zonte, making use of local ore and coke and im-
ported alloy metals to attract investors to this
mineral-rich district of Minas Gerais.
World production and distribution of
lron and Steel
Two countries, the U.S.S.R. and the U.S.A. are
leading producers in both iron ore and steel.
The U.S.S.R. leads the world in both iron ore pro-
duction (27 per cent) and steel production (22 per
Fig. 28.8 Flow Chart showing the manufacturing of steel
H€arth
cent in 1977) (see Fig. 28.11). Its greatest single
iron field is at Krivoi Rog to the north of the
Black Sea. Much smelting and steel production is
done in the Donetz Basin. Iron ore is also mined in
the Kerch Peninsula with steelworks on the shores
of the Sea of Azov. Other iron and steel areas
include Magnitogosrk (magnetite iron), Nizhny
Tagil and Ivdel of the Urals, and the Kuznetz basin
in Siberia (Fig.28.7).
The United States accounted for 17 per cent of
the world's crude steel and 7 per cent of iron ore in
1977 (Fig. 28.11). The iron ore deposits in the Mesabi
Hills south-west of Lake Superior were once all
important, but are now being exhausted. The major
steel areas are in Pittsburgh, and the Great Lakes
region stretching from Chicago to Detroit and Buf-
structural
sh!p6
-;? 
sneets
6.fQ *',.
-_l;T
Basic Oxyg6n
tric Furnace
€Le::l;ili;.","."

Fig. 28.9 The iron and steel industry of the Ukraine region
Fig.28.10 The iron and steel industry of north-eastern
u.s.A.
falo; the Eastern Atlantic States centred at Phila-
delphia and Baltimore (Fig. 28.10); the south-east,
centred at Birmingham (Albama) and west, in Fon-
tana (Los Angeles) and San Francisco. Much ore is
now imported from fields in Labrador, Canada and
from Brazil, Venezuela and Liberia.
After the U.S.S.R. and the U.S.A. the other iron
and steel areas are mostly in Europe including West
Germany, France, the United Kingdom, Sweden,
Italy, Belgium, Poland and Czechoslovakia. Their
respective output of iron and steel are shown in the
table in Fig. 28.11(a) and (b)
In Europe, there is far more coal than iron. The
French iron and steel industry in the north-eastern
industrial district depends on local Lorraine iron ore
and coal from the Franco-Belgian coalfield.
Some ore is available from Sweden and Mauritania
and is used in the steelworks in Dunkirk. The
greatest iron and steel centre of Germany is in the
Ruhr region where the imported iron ore from Lux-
embourg and Sweden is smelted with excellent cok-
ing coal from the Ruhr Coalfield. In Scandinavia are
high quality haematite and magnetite iron ore
depoSits at Kiruna and Gallivare, Lapland and in the
Swedish Lake Depression. Much of the iron is used
locally at Stockholm and Eskilstuna, with imported
coke from Germany and Britain for making steel.
Of the major steel producers Britain has least iron,
mainly low grade siderite ores of the Jurassic rocks
Major iron ore producers by percentage
of world total,1977
u.s.s.R.
Australia
Brazil
U.S.A.
China
Vo
t2
Canada
India
S. Africa
Sweden
Liberia
France
Vo
5.5
J
2.5
Fig.28.11(a) Major iron ore producers by percentage of
world total, '1977 U.N. Statistical yearbook.
Fig. 28.11(b) Major steel producers by percentage of world
total U.N. Statistical Yearbook 1977
PH Philadelphia
P Pittsburgh
HA Hamilton
U.S.A. 10% steel East sea
board
33% Great Lakes
33% Pitrsburgh
Canada 80% Lakeside
Sault St. Marie
Hamilton
! 
steel centre
- 
lron ore
I ..- Coal
,41t iron ore
tul 
producing areas
B Bethlehem
C Cleveland
SP Sparrows Point
Y Younqstown
q{EaEi9t?:€:EE
ao. FP:s 
E ji:;Eg;
1r-! 
" 
;
-o*6"36=!
o

from the Cleveland Hills, Lincolnshire and Nor-
thamptonshire. Much has to be imported from Swe-
den, Spain (from the Cantabrian Mountains) and
France, to be smelted with local coking coal. There
are iron and steelworks in Northamptonshire, South
Wales, Middlesborough and the Central valley of
Scotland.
Japan, the most industrialized country in Asia
accounts for 15 per cent of the world's steel produc-
tion. It depends on imported ore from the Philip-
pines, Australia, and till quite recently from
Peninsular Malaysia too (from Bukit Besi, Kuala
Dungun and Ulu Rompin). Japan's own iron ore,
mined at Kamaishi and Kutchan, hardly supplies a
tenth of her industrial needs. Much scrap iron is used
to supplement her deficiency in the ore.
India produces 5.5 per cent of the world's iron ore
(mainly haematite) from her outcrops in Bihar and
Orissa. This area also contains India's large-scale
iron and steelworks at Jamshedpur, Durgapur,
Rourkela and Bhilai. China's iron ore deposits (7
per cent) are located at Anshan, Manchuria; Daye
(Tayeh), Hebei (Hopei) where Wuhan (Wuchang,
Hanyang and Hankou/Hankow) is the leading iron
and steel district. New areas are also increasing pro-
duction, e.g. Baotou (Paotow) in Inner Mongolia,
Taiyuan in Shanxi (Shansi) and Chongqing
(Chungking) in Sichuan (Szechwan).
The southern continents have rich deposits of iron
ore but make little steel. Australia's iron ore are at
Mt. Tom Price, Iron Knob, Yampi Sound and there
are steelworks at Whyalla, Newcastle and Port Kem-
bla. Australia is self-sufficient in iron and steel.
There are large iron ore deposits in Itabira, Brazil
in the mineral-rich Minas Gerais district. There are
steelworks at Volta Redonda and Belo Horizonte.
There are also rich ore deposits in the south of Ven-
ezuela. Africa is rich in iron ore but has little coal.
High grade deposits are being exploited in Liberia
and Mauritania. Vereeniging in South Africa, is the
centre of the iron and steel industrv.
Major lron and Steel areas
of the world
l. The world's three greatest steel producers are: the
U.S.A. (24%), the U.S.S.R. (22%) urd Japan (13%). West
Germury accounts for 8% while the United Kingdom
accounts for 5%. France, Italy and China e4ch accounts
for about 3%. Some steel also comes from Belgium,
Poland, Czechoslovakia and Canada(2Vo each).
2. The major iron and steel areas of the producing
countries are as follows:
(a) The United States of America.
(i) The Pittsburgh area ofPennsylvania;
(ii) The lake Michigan area (Chicago and Gary);
(iii) The Lake Erie area (Detroit, Cleveland and Buf-
falo);
(iv) The Atlantic Seaboard @ethlehem, Sparrows
Point and Morrisville);
(v) The Southern Appalachian region (Birmingham).
(b) The Soviet Union.
(i) The Donbas (Donetz) region of the lJkraine
(Krivoi Rog is the largest);
(ii) The Ural region (at Sverlovsk, Magnitogorsk and
Nizhny Tagil);
(iii) The Kuzbas (Kuznetsk) region (uses iron'ore
from the Urals with local coal at the Kuzbas Coal-
field);
(iv) The Karaganda region (Temir Tan is a new iron
and steel town);
(v) Eastern U.S.S.R. (at Komsomolsk).
(c) lilestern Europe.
(i) Britain. North-east England at Middlesborough,
Stockton and Darlington; Lincolnshire at Scunthorpe
and Fordington; the Midlands at Birmingham and
Sheffield; Northamptonshire at Corby; south Wales at
Margam and Port Talbot; also at north Wales and
Lancashire.
(ii) Iltest Germany. The Ruhr region at Essen,
Bochum and Solingen;
(i]d) France. The Lorraine region at Metz and Thion-
ville;
(iv) Belgium. The Franco-Belgian Coallteld region at
Liege and Charleroi;
(v) Luxembozrg. Southern Luxembourg at Esch,
Dudelange and Differdange ;
(vi) Sweden. The Lake Depression region around
Stockholm and Eskilstuna:
(vn) Imly. The industrial triangle of Milan, Turin
and Genoa.
(d\ Asia.
(1) China. Southern Manchuria at Anshan and
Mukden or Shenyang; the Wuhan region (especially
Hankow city); the Szechwan region around Chung-
king and Chengtu; the Shansi-Paotow area at Paotow,
Taiyuan and Tatung.
(ii) India. The Damodar Industrial Region at Janr
shedpur, Durgapur, Rourkela and Bhilai;
(nl Japan. The Keihin Industrial Region at Tokyo,
Yokohama and Chiba; the Hanshin lndustrial Region
at Kobe and Osaka; the Kitakyushu lndustrial Region
around Yawata; also in the isolated cities of Nagoya,

Chungoku,Muroran and Kamaishi: 
(ii) South America. In Brazil, at Volta Redonda and
(e) The Southern Continents. 
Belo Horizonte;
(l) Australasra. In Sydney, Newcastle, Port Kembla 
0n) Afnca. In the Republic of'South Afrlca at the
and Whyalla; 
Witwatenrand area.
Ouestions and Exercises
1. Select three important industrial areas in either Europe or Asia:
(a) Draw large sketch maps to show their location.
(b) Name any two of the industrial towns in each.
(c) State their chief manufactured products.
(d) Explain the industrial growth in any one of them.
2. (a) With the aid of separate sketch maps, locate an example of an iron and steel industry which is
located
(i) on a coalfield;
(ii) on an iron field;
(iii) where neither coal nor iron ore is present.
(b) For any one of the above trace back the factors which have led to their rapid industrial growth.
3. (a) Why is the iron and steel industry considered to be the basis of all industries?
(b) What ferro-alloys are normally used in the manufacture of alloyed steel?
(c) Describe the specific qualities of any one of these alloyed steel.
4. The following are some of the major iron and steel areas of the world:
(a) The Ruhr-Westphalia Area (West Germany);
(b) The Pittsburgtrlake Erie Area (U.S.A.);
(c) The Yokohama-Chiba Area (Japan);
(d) The Newcastle-Port Kembla Area (Australia).
Account for the factors that have led to the growth and importance of the iron and steel industry in
any two of the abgve areas.
5. Write briefly on any two of the following:
(a) The effects of changes in technology on the location of the iron and steel industry.
(b) The world's major iron and steel areas have a coastal location.
(c) Relate the location of iron and steel mills to sources of fuel and raw materials.
(d) Japan has very little iron ore but she is a major producer of steel.
Sample Objective Ouestions
l. The world's iron and steel industries 
cessed in steel mills till the invention 
C the Malaysian government re-
are often located where coking coal, 
of the 
fuses to sell the ore to Japan
iron ore and limestone are readily 
A open-hearth process 
D cheaper ore is available else-
available. This is mainly 
B electric furnace 
where
A because these three essential 
C Gilchrist-Thomas Bessemer pro-
items always occur together 
cess 
4. The coke used in the iron and steel-
B to lessen the transport charges of 
D oxygen process 
works comes from
these bulky products 
A bituminous coal
C because local capital is always 
3. Japan used to buy large quantities of 
B lignite
available in such areas 
iron ore from Malaysia, but has 
C gypsum
D because immigrant labour can be 
stopped doing so recently because 
D kaolin
attracted to work here 
" i1.. oT,:1'1.:i":t""XtXt:fiT -' 
5. of the forowing ramous structural
2. In Europe, iron ore with a high con- 
B Japan's iron and steel industry 
constructions of the world, select the
tent of phosphorus could not be pro- 
has been hard hit by the oil crisis 
one which contains the greatest

amount of iron and steel.
A the Statue of Liberty, New York
B the Eiffel Tower, 'Pans
C the Sydney Harbour Bridge, Syd-
ney
D Buckingham Palace, London
6. The greatest concentration of the
iron and steel industry is found in
A Mediterranean Europe
B north-east U.S.A.
C coastal China
D New South Wales" Australia
7. The ingredients for making steel are
I iron ore
II aluminium
III coke
IV limestone
V sulphuric acid
VI air
VII water
A All, except II and VI
B All, except III and VII
C All, except II and V
D All, except IV and V
8. The two countries which are not
only major world iron ore produc-
ers, but also lead in the production
of steel are
A the U.S.A. and Japan
B the U.S.S.R. and West Germany
C the United Kingdom and the
U.S.S.R.
D the U.S.A. and the U.S.S.R.
9. Large iron and steelworks are found
around the Jamshedpur area in In-
dia for these reasons except
A much coal is availabie
B presence of high grade iron ore
C ferro-alloys are easily obtainable
nearby
D Jamshedpur has a deep-water
harbour
10. Iron ore can be alloyed with many
other ferro-metals to yield steel of
specific quality. Which ferro-metal
is employed to increase the strength
and hardiness of the steel, e.g. in the
nianufacture of dredges and steam
rollers?
A cobalt
B manganese
C vanadium
D nickel
11 . The iron and steelworks of the world
are sometimes located in coalfields,
in iron ore fields. some in both areas
and some in neither. From the fol-
lowing major iron and steel towns
select one which is situated in an
iron ore field.
A Duluth, U.S.A.
B Birmingham, U.K.
C Moscow. U.S.S.R.
D Chiba, Japan
In recent years. an increasing num-
ber of iron and steelworks have been
sited in
A isolated continental interiors
B coastal districts
C the oilfields
D disused mining land
Of the following iron and steel manu-
facturing regions, which is most de-
pendent on imported ores?
A Anshan, Manchuria
B Damodar. India
C Ruhr, West Germany
D Ukraine, U.S.S.R.
The bar graph shows four major pro-
ducers of iron orc in 19'77 . Which one
represents that of USSR?
300/"
15. A coastal location is preferred for
modern integrated iron and steel
mills because
A water for cooling purposes is
available
B it enjoys a cool maritime climate
C it is accessible to cheap, abundant
labour
D it facilitates the imPort of raw
materials
16. The world's location of the iron and
steel industry has been undergoing
many changes since the industry was
first established. This is mainly due to
A the discovery of new iron ore
fields
B the closure of many coalfields
C the improved technology in the
making of iron and steel
D the oil crisis.
17. Of the following iron and steel areas
of the world, which is LEAST dePen'
dent on the import of foreign ores for
its steel mills?
A Ruhr-Westphalia
B Kobe-Osaka
C Milan-Genoa
D Anshan-Shenyang
18. Of the following factors which has
the greatest influence on the location
of the iron and steel industry of
Japan?
A The availability of skilled workers
B The availability of cheap and
abundant hydro power
C The proximity to local coal and
iron deposits
D The presence of port facilitates
19. What type of iron ore is abundantly
found in the Karuna resion of
Sweden
A magnetite
B haematite
C limonite
D siderite
20. This map of north-eastern North
America shows the import of an im-
portant raw material for the iron and
steel industry via the St. Lawrence-
Great Lakes Waterways. It is
A bituminous coal for coke
B ha*ratite ore for smelting
C manganese for alloyed steel
D limestone as a reducing agent
Ouebec
t./
Trenton
12.
IJ
t4.
A
B
C
D
Buffalo
B
,O
faom Venezuela
Cuba and Chile
21. The manufacturing industry of the
world has advanced very rapidly,
creating a very wide range of manu-
factured products and a subsequent
reduction in the cost of production.
This is possible for the following
reasons except
A Mechanization simplifies and
speed up production
LABRAOOR
Knot La*e$
,{}l

B Specialization improves the quali-
ty of production
C Mass production enjoys the eco-
nomies of large-scale production
D Automation utilizes a larser
Iabour force
22. An example of a light industry is
A industrial machinery industry
B transport equipment industry
C petrochemicalsindustry
D iron and steel industry
23. Of the following major industrial
cities, which one is not connected
with the automobile indusiry?
A Coventry, U.K.
B Marseilles, France
C Wolfsburg, West Germany
D Turin. Italv
24. T}:'e following statements outline
some of the usual factors that contri-
bute to the growth of the major in-
dustrial areas in the world:
I location in a coalfield
II nearness to an iron ore field.
III served by a navigable waterway
IV sited on a deep-water harbour
on the coast
V a ready supply of skilled labour-
ers
VI availability of all required raw
materials
Which two of these statements,
together with I and II, are applicable
to the Ruhr-Westphalia Industrial
District of West Germanv?
A III and V
B III and VI
C IVandV
D IV and VI
25. What type of industry requires a vast
area of level ground, fine weather,
highly skilled workers, very heavy
capital and an enormous expendi-
ture on research, design, promotion
and security?
A shipbuilding
B locomotive engineering
C aircraft industry
D heavy chemicals industry
26. The southern continents are nor ex-
tensively industrialized. Which of
the following areas is /east industrial-
ized?
A Whyalla, Australia
B Rotorua, New Zraland
C Belo Horizonte. Brazil
D Durban, South Africa

