[Source: NCERT Class XI "Fundamentals of Physical Geography", Chapter 7 "Landforms and their Evolution" — GROUNDWATER / Karst section, OCR-extracted from pages 65-67, plus relevant Sample Objective Questions from pages 74-75]

GROUNDWATER
Here the interest is not on groundwater as a resource. Our focus is on the work of groundwater in the erosion of landmasses and evolution of landforms. The surface water percolates well when the rocks are permeable, thinly bedded and highly jointed and cracked. After vertically going down to some depth, the water under the ground flows horizontally through the bedding planes, joints or through the materials themselves. It is this downward and horizontal movement of water which causes the rocks to erode. Physical or mechanical removal of materials by moving groundwater is insignificant in developing landforms. That is why, the results of the work of groundwater cannot be seen in all types of rocks. But in rocks like limestones or dolomites rich in calcium carbonate, the surface water as well as groundwater through the chemical process of solution and precipitation deposition develop varieties of landforms. These two processes of solution and precipitation are active in limestones or dolomites occurring either exclusively or interbedded with other rocks. Any limestone or dolomitic region showing typical landforms produced by the action of groundwater through the processes of solution and deposition is called Karst topography after the typical topography developed in limestone rocks of Karst region in the Balkans adjacent to Adriatic sea.

The karst topography is also characterised by erosional and depositional landforms.

EROSIONAL LANDFORMS

Pools, Sinkholes, Lapies and Limestone Pavements
Small to medium sized round to sub-rounded shallow depressions called swallow holes form on the surface of limestones through solution. Sinkholes are very common in limestone/karst areas. A sinkhole is an opening more or less circular at the top and funnel-shaped towards the bottom with sizes varying in area from a few sq. m to a hectare and with depth from less than half a metre to thirty metres or more. Some of these form solely through solution action (solution sinks) and others might start as solution forms first and if the bottom of a sinkhole forms the roof of a void or cave underground, it might collapse leaving a large hole opening into a cave or a void below (collapse sinks). Quite often, sinkholes are covered up with soil mantle and appear as shallow water pools. Anybody stepping over such pools would go down like it happens in quicksands in deserts. The term doline is sometimes used to refer to the collapse sinks. Solution sinks are more common than collapse sinks. Quite often the surface run-off simply goes down swallow and sink holes and flows as underground streams and re-emerge at a distance downstream through a cave opening.

When sink holes and dolines join together because of slumping of materials along their margins or due to roof collapse of caves, long, narrow to wide trenches called valley sinks or uvalas form. Gradually, most of the surface of the limestone is eaten away by these pits and trenches, leaving it extremely irregular with a maze of points, grooves and ridges or lapies. Especially, these ridges or lapies form due to differential solution activity along parallel to sub-parallel joints. The lapie field may eventually turn into somewhat smooth limestone pavements.

Caves
In areas where there are alternating beds of rocks (shales, sandstones, quartzites) with limestones or dolomites in between or in areas where limestones are dense, massive and occurring as thick beds, cave formation is prominent. Water percolates down either through the materials or through cracks and joints and moves horizontally along bedding planes. It is along these bedding planes that the limestone dissolves and long and narrow wide gaps called caves result. There can be a maze of caves at different elevations depending upon the limestone beds and intervening rocks. Caves normally have an opening through which cave streams are discharged. Caves having openings at both the ends are called tunnels.

DEPOSITIONAL LANDFORMS
Many depositional forms develop within the limestone caves. The chief chemical in limestone is calcium carbonate which is easily soluble in carbonated water (carbon dioxide absorbed rainwater). This calcium carbonate is deposited when the water carrying it in solution evaporates or loses its carbon dioxide as it trickles over rough rock surfaces.

Stalactites, Stalagmites and Pillars
Stalactites hang as icicles of different diameters. Normally they are broad at their bases and taper towards the free ends showing up in a variety of forms. Stalagmites rise up from the floor of the caves. In fact, stalagmites form due to dripping water from the surface or through the thin pipe of the stalactite, immediately below it. Stalagmites may take the shape of a column, a disc, with either a smooth, rounded bulging end or a miniature crater like depression. The stalagmite and stalactites eventually fuse to give rise to columns and pillars of different diameters.

--- Relevant Sample Objective Questions from Chapter 7 exercises (pages 74-75), used only as fact-grounding reference, not copied verbatim into the question bank ---
(iii) In which one of the following regions the chemical weathering process is more dominant than the mechanical process? — Answer: Limestone region (option b)
(iv) Which one of the following sentences best defines the term 'Lapies'? — Answer: An irregular surface with sharp pinnacles, grooves and ridges (option d)
(iii, short answer prompt) Underground flow of water is more common than surface run-off in limestone areas — Why? [reasoning: high porosity/jointing + solubility of limestone favours infiltration and underground channelling over surface flow]
(ii, short answer prompt) Explain the evolution of valley sinks or uvalas. [reasoning: sinkholes and dolines join together due to slumping of materials along their margins or due to roof collapse of caves, forming long, narrow to wide trenches]
